
How to Get Rich
and Stay RichRich Dad's Retire YoungRetire Rich

How to Get Rich
and Stay RichRich Dad's Retire YoungRetire Rich
®
If you purchase this book without a cover, or purchase a PDF , jpg, or tiff copy of this book, 
it is likely stolen property or a counterfeit. In that case, neither the authors, the publisher, 
nor any of their employees or agents has received any payment for the copy. Furthermore, 
counterfeiting is a known avenue of financial support for organized crime and terrorist 
groups. We urge you to please not purchase any such copy and to report any instance of 
someone selling such copies to Plata Publishing LLC.
This publication is designed to provide competent and reliable information regarding the 
subject matter covered. However, it is sold with the understanding that the author and 
publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, financial, or other professional advice. Laws 
and practices often vary from state to state and country to country and if legal or other 
expert assistance is required, the services of a professional should be sought. The author  
and publisher specifically disclaim any liability that is incurred from the use or application 
of the contents of this book.
Copyright © 2012 by CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as 
permitted under the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means or stored in a database 
or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by Plata Publishing, LLC  
CASHFLOW, Rich Dad, Rich Dad Advisors, and ESBI, are registered trademarks of 
CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc.         
               are registered trademarks of 
               CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc.
Plata Publishing, LLC  
4330 N. Civic Center Plaza  
Suite 100  
Scottsdale, AZ  85251  
(480) 998-6971
Visit our websites: PlataPublishing.com and RichDad.com   
Printed in the United States of America  
082014
First Edition: January 2002
First Plata Publishing Edition: May 2012
ISBN:  978-1-61268-040-8

T o all people who have gone before us...  
people who have made all of our lives better and  
more abundant today.

Author’s Note
This book was completed six months before the tragic events of 
September 11, 2001. Nonetheless, the information in this book is 
more important now than ever before.
During these uncertain times, your financial education becomes 
even more valuable.
If you’re tired of the same old investment advice—such as  
“Be patient,” “Invest for the long term,” and “Diversify”—then  
this book is for you.

Contents
INTRODUCTION   
Why David Met Goliath  ............................................................................... 1
SECTION ONE: The Leverage of Your Mind
Chapter One  
How to Become Rich and Retire Young  ...................................................... 15
Chapter Two  
Retire as Young as You Can  ......................................................................... 25
Chapter Three  
How I Retired Early  ................................................................................... 33
Chapter Four  
How You Can Retire Early  .................................................................................. 47
Chapter Five  
The Leverage of Your Mind  ......................................................................... 61
Chapter Six  
What Do You Think Is Risky?  .................................................................... 77
Chapter Seven  
How to Work Less and Earn More  .............................................................. 91
Chapter Eight  
The Fastest Way to Get Rich  ..................................................................... 107
SECTION TWO: The Leverage of Your Plan 
Chapter Nine  
How Fast Is Your Plan?  .............................................................................. 117
Chapter T en  
The Leverage of Seeing a Rich Future  ........................................................ 135 
Chapter Eleven  
The Leverage of Integrity  ........................................................................... 161
Chapter Twelve  
The Leverage of Fairy Tales  ............................................................................... 173
Chapter Thirteen  
The Leverage of Generosity  ....................................................................... 193
SECTION THREE: The Leverage of Your Actions 
Chapter Fourteen  
The Leverage of Habits  ............................................................................. 221
Chapter Fifteen  
The Leverage of Your Money  ..................................................................... 237
Chapter Sixteen  
The Leverage of Real Estate  ....................................................................... 251
Chapter Seventeen  
The Leverage of Paper Assets  ..................................................................... 271 
Chapter Eighteen  
The Leverage of a B-Quadrant Business  ..................................................... 311
Chapter Nineteen  
Hot Tips  .................................................................................................... 327 
Chapter Twenty  
Different Realities  ...................................................................................... 355
SECTION FOUR: The Leverage of Your First Step
Chapter Twenty-one  
How to Keep Going  .................................................................................. 361
In Closing  ................................................................................................. 369Contents
Introduction
WHY DAVID 
MET GOLIATH1The story of David and Goliath was one of rich dad’s favorite stories. 
I suspect he may have seen himself as David, a man who started with 
nothing, yet rose to compete against the giants of business. Rich dad 
said, “David could beat Goliath because David knew how to use the 
power of leverage. A young boy and a simple slingshot were far more 
powerful than the feared giant, Goliath. That is the power of leverage.”
My previous books were on the power of cash flow. Rich dad said, 
“Cash flow  is the most important term in the world of money. The 
second most important is  leverage .” He also said, “Leverage is the reason 
some people become rich, and others do not.” Rich dad went on to 
explain that leverage is power and that power can work in your favor  
or against you. Because leverage is power, some use it, some abuse 
it, and others fear it. He said, “The reason less than 5 percent of all 
Americans are rich is because only 5 percent know how to use the power 
of leverage. Many who want to become rich, fail to become rich because 
they abuse the power. And most people do not become rich because  
they fear the power of leverage.”
 
There Are Many Forms of Leverage
Leverage comes in many forms. One of the recognized forms of 
leverage is the leverage of borrowing money. Today we are aware of the 
severe problem of people abusing this powerful form of leverage. Millions 
of people struggle financially because the power of debt leverage is used 
Introduction2
against them. Because of the consequences of the abuse of debt leverage, 
many people now fear this form of leverage, saying, “Cut up your credit 
cards, pay off your mortgage, and get out of debt.” 
My rich dad would chuckle and say, “Cutting up your credit 
cards won’t make you rich. Cutting up my credit cards only makes me 
miserable.” Nonetheless, rich dad agreed that if you were abusive with 
the power of debt leverage, you definitely should cut up your credit 
cards, pay off your mortgage, and get out of debt. He said, “Giving 
a credit card to some people is like giving a loaded gun to a drunk. 
Anyone who is near the drunk is in danger, including the drunk.” 
Instead of teaching us to fear the power of debt leverage, rich dad 
taught his son and me how to  use the power of debt leverage in our 
favor. That is why he often said, “There is good debt and bad debt. Good 
debt makes you rich and bad debt makes you poor.” Most people are 
loaded down with bad debt and many others live in fear of debt and are 
proud to be debt free, even to the point of being free of any good debt. 
In this book, you will find out how my wife, Kim, and I retired 
young and retired rich because we were deeply in debt, deeply in debt 
with good debt, debt that made us rich and financially free. In other 
words, we used the power of leverage, we did not abuse the power, nor 
do we live in fear of its power. Instead we respect the power of leverage 
and use it wisely and cautiously.
Can Everyone Be Rich?
During the hundreds of interviews I have given after the release 
of the first Rich Dad book, I am asked this question: “Do you think 
everyone can be rich?” 
I reply, “Yes. I believe everyone has the potential to be rich.” 
At that point, I am often asked, “If everyone has the potential to  
be rich, why do so few actually become rich?”
My usual reply is, “I don’t have the time today to answer that 
question.” they insist, I may say, “Many of the answers are found in  
my first four books in the Rich Dad series.”
 If the interviewer is persistent they may ask something like,  
“When will you give us all the answers?”
Retire Young Retire Rich3
I reply, “I don’t know if anyone has all the answers.”
Even though I do not have all the answers, I am very happy to be 
finally bringing this book, book number five in the Rich Dad series, to 
you. This book will explain why I believe all of us already have the power 
and the potential to be very rich... and I do mean all of us, not just some 
of us. It will also explain how my wife, Kim, and I could retire young 
and retire rich, even though we started without any money. And it will 
also explain why some people are rich and why others are poor even 
though we all have the power and the potential to be very rich and retire 
young. It’s all a matter of leverage.
The first four books in the Rich Dad series were primarily about the 
power of cash flow. This book is about leverage. Why one entire book? 
The reason is because leverage is a very big word, encompassing and 
touching virtually everything in our lives. 
This book will focus on three important forms of leverage;  
leverage of your mind, plan and actions.
Section One: The Leverage of Your Mind  
This is the most important section of the book. In this section, you 
will find out why money does not make you rich. In this section, 
you will find out that the most powerful form of leverage in the 
world, your mind, has the power to make you rich or make you 
poor. Just as someone can use, abuse, or fear the power of debt 
leverage, the same is true when it comes to your brain, a very 
powerful form of leverage.
Words Are Leverage  
You will find out the power of words. Rich dad always said, “Words 
are leverage. Words are powerful tools, tools for the brain. But just 
as you can use debt to make you rich or poor, words can be used to 
make you rich or poor. In this section, you will find out about the 
power of words and how rich people use rich words and poor people 
use poor words. Rich dad often said, “Your brain can be your most 
powerful asset, or it can be your most powerful liability. If you use 
the right words in your brain, you will become very rich. If you use 
Introduction4
the wrong words, your brain will make you poor.” In this section, you 
will find out about rich words and poor words. 
You will find out why rich dad said, “It does not take money to make 
money.” He said, “Getting rich begins with your words, and words 
are free.” 
Why Investing Is Not Risky  
In this book, you will find out why people who say, “Investing is 
risky,” are some of the biggest losers in the investment markets. 
Again it goes back to words. You will find out that what you think 
is real becomes your reality. You will find out why people who 
think investing is risky invest in the riskiest of all investments. It’s 
caused by their reality. In this book, you will find out why investing 
does not have to be risky. In order to find safer, higher-yielding 
investments, people must first begin by changing their words.
 As stated earlier, the power of leverage can be used, abused, or 
feared. In this section, you will find out how to use the leverage  
of your brain in your financial favor, rather than use it against you. 
Rich dad said, “Most people take the most powerful leverage in  
the world, their brain, and use that power to make them poor.  
That is not the use of that power. It’s abuse. Every time you say,  
‘I can’t afford it’ or ‘I can’t do that’ or ‘Investing is risky’ or ‘I’ll never 
be rich,’ you are using the most powerful form of leverage you have  
to abuse yourself.”
 If you want to retire young and retire rich, you will need to use your 
brain in your favor, not against you. If you cannot do that, the other 
two sections of this book will not be possible for you, even though 
they are easy to do. If you can gain control over your most powerful 
form of leverage, the next two sections will be easy.
Retire Young Retire Rich5
Section T wo: The Leverage of  Your Plan
 In book number three, Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote that 
“investing is a plan.” In order for Kim and me to retire young, we 
had to have a plan, a plan that started with nothing because we  
had nothing. The plan had an end or an exit, and it also had a time 
limit. Our time limit was ten years or less. It took us nine years, 
retiring in 1994. I was 47 and Kim was 37. Although we started 
with nothing, we exited with approximately $85,000 to $120,000 
a year in income without working. Our income was now coming 
solely from our investments. Even though it may not have been a 
lot of money, we were financially free because our expenses were 
less than $50,000 a year.
 We Retired Young in Order to Get Rich  
One of the advantages of retiring young is that we now had the 
free time to get rich. By the way, Forbes magazine defines rich as 
$1 million or more a year in income. In other words, according to 
Forbes , we were not yet rich when we retired. Knowing that, one of 
the reasons for retiring young was so that we would have the time 
to get rich. After retiring, our plan was to spend time investing 
and building businesses. Today, not only do we have substantial 
real estate holdings, we have built a publishing company, a mining 
company, a technology company, and an oil company, as well 
as investments in the stock market. As rich dad often said, “The 
problem with having a job is that it gets in the way of getting rich.” 
In other words, we retired young so that we would have the time 
to become rich. Today, our income per year from our investments 
and businesses is in the millions and is climbing steadily, even after 
the stock market crashed. Everything is going according to plan.
 In book number three, Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing,  I wrote that 
most people have a plan to be poor. That is why so many people say, 
“When I retire, my income will go down.” In other words, they are 
saying, “I plan on working hard all my life and then I will become 
poorer after I retire.” That may have been an okay plan in the 
Industrial Age, but that is a very poor plan in the Information Age.
Introduction6
 Millions of workers are now counting on their retirement plans, 
plans such as a 401(k), IRA, Superannuation plans of Australia, 
RRSP plans of Canada, and other plans to be there when they retire. 
These plans are what I call Information Age retirement plans.  
I call them that because in the Information Age, employees are now 
responsible for their retirement. In the Industrial Age, it was the 
company or the government that would take care of your financial 
needs once your working days were over. There is one tragic flaw in 
these Information-Age retirement plans. The flaw is that most of 
these plans are indexed to the stock market, and as you may have 
noticed, stock markets go up and stock markets go down. It shocks  
me to realize that millions and millions of hardworking people are 
now betting their financial future and their financial security on a 
stock market. What will happen to these workers if, for example, 
they are 85 years old and their retirement plan is wiped out, either 
by depletion, theft, or a market crash? Are you going to say to them, 
“Get a job and begin saving for retirement”? That is why I am 
concerned and why I write and why I teach. I believe we need to 
better educate and better prepare people for the Information Age—
the age where we all need to know a lot more about money, the age 
where we all need to be more financially responsible and depend less 
on a company or government to take care of us when our working 
days are over.
 Just look at the numbers. In the year 2010, the first of 75 million 
baby boomers began to retire. Over the years, let’s say that each of 
these 75 million retirees begins to collect just $1,000 per month 
from the promised government retirement plan that they have 
contributed to, and another $1,000 per month from the financial 
markets. If my math is correct, 75 million x $1,000 comes to $75 
billion per month from the government program and another 
$75 billion from the financial markets. Seventy-five billion dollars 
per month coming out of the government and from the financial 
markets will have a dramatic impact on both institutions. What will 
the government do? Increase taxes? What will the financial markets 
do when $75 billion comes out of the market instead of going in? 
Retire Young Retire Rich7
Advise you to “Buy and hold, invest for the long term, and diversify 
your portfolio?” Will the financial advisors continue to say, “The 
stock market on average always goes up”? I don’t have a crystal ball 
and I do not pretend to predict the future, but I can say this much. 
A combined $150 billion coming out of these two large institutions 
instead of going in will cause a few ripples in the economy.
 The old plans from the old economy will cause millions of people 
financial hardship once their working days are over. Millions 
in America do not have a company retirement plan or personal 
retirement plan. What will they do? Look for a job? Work all their 
lives? Move in with their kids or grandkids? Planning to work hard 
all your life is a poor plan. Even though it’s a poor plan, millions 
of people have this plan, even some people who are making a lot 
of money today. They are working hard today but have nothing 
set aside for tomorrow. For many baby boomers, time, our most 
important asset, is running out.
 Then I hear people say, “I won’t need much money after I retire. My 
house will be debt free and my living expenses will go down.” While 
it is true that your living expenses may go down, what goes up are 
your medical expenses. Already medicine, health, and dental care are 
too expensive for many working people. What will happen when the 
medical industry is faced with millions of retirees who need health 
care to live, but have no money to pay? And if you believe in Medicare 
saving you, then you probably believe in the Easter Bunny also.
 Maybe this is why Alan Greenspan, former chairman of the Federal 
Reserve Board, said, “We need to start teaching financial literacy 
in our schools.” We need to start teaching our kids to take care 
of themselves financially, rather than teaching them to expect the 
government or the company they work for to take care of them after 
they retire.
 If you want to retire young and retire rich, you will need a better 
plan than most people have. Section T wo is about the very 
important leverage of having a plan on how to retire young and 
retire rich.
Introduction8
 Section Three: The Leverage of  Your Actions
 There is an overused story about three birds sitting on a fence.  
The question is, “If two birds decide to fly away, how many birds 
are left?” The answer is, “Three birds are left.” The lesson is, just 
because you decide to do something does not mean you will do what 
you decide to do. In the real world, less than 5 percent of the U.S. 
population is rich because 95 percent of the population may want  
to be rich, but only 5 percent take any action.
 In book number four, Rich Kid Smart Kid , I write about how our 
school system punishes kids for making mistakes. Yet, if you look at 
how we learn, we learn from our mistakes. Most of us learn to ride 
a bicycle only by falling off a few times. We learn to walk by falling 
a few times. Then we get to school, and we are taught not to fall. 
We are taught that people who fall are stupid. We are taught that 
smart people are people who sit like the three birds on the fence 
and memorize the right answers. It’s a small wonder why only 5 
percent of America’s people become rich. If you look at some of the 
richest people in the world—people such as Bill Gates, founder of 
Microsoft; Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computers; Ted T urner, 
founder of CNN; Henry Ford, founder of Ford Motor Company; 
and Thomas Edison, founder of General Electric—they all did not 
finish school.
 I am not saying that school is bad. In the Information Age, school 
and education are more important than ever before. I am saying that 
sometimes to be successful, we need to learn to not do what we have 
been taught to do. If you want to be more successful, simply watch 
how kids learn and copy them. One of the things I had to learn was 
how to overcome the fear of making mistakes, the fear of failing, and 
the fear of being embarrassed. Most young kids know how to do that 
naturally, but then we teach them not to do it in school. If I had not 
been able to learn how to make mistakes, how to fail, and how to 
overcome my embarrassment, I would not have been able to retire 
young and retire rich.
Retire Young Retire Rich9
Three Easy Things Everyone Can Do to Become Rich
I have always said that what you have to do to become rich is simple 
and easy. Almost anyone can do it. I am happy to share this book 
because Sections 1 and 2 prepare you to do the simple things you need 
to do if you want to retire young and retire rich. I will go into the three 
main assets that make people rich and allow them to retire young. The 
three asset classes are:
•  Real estate
• Paper assets
• Business
In Section 3, you will find out what you can do to begin acquiring 
these three vitally important assets. The reason my wife Kim and I could 
retire young and retire rich is because we spent our time acquiring assets 
rather than working for money.
If you can read this book, you can do the simple action steps to 
begin acquiring these important assets, the assets that the rich 5 percent 
of the population acquires. I promise you that you can do the action 
steps, but you will need to read the first two sections of this book. If 
you do not read the first two sections, you may not be able to do the 
action steps, even if they are easy to do. As rich dad said to me years ago, 
“Getting rich begins with the right mindset, the right words, and the 
right plan. After you have that, the action steps are easy.”
So why did David meet Goliath? Rich dad’s answer to this was, 
“David met Goliath so he could meet the giant inside of himself.”  
He also said, “Inside each of us is a David and a Goliath. Many 
people are unsuccessful in life because they run when they meet Goliath. 
Without Goliath, David would never have become a giant of a man.” 
Rich dad used this story to inspire his son and me to become financial 
giants. In other words, instead of killing the giant, rich dad inspired us 
to become giants.
This book is about becoming financially free. Kim and I achieved 
that freedom by acquiring and building assets that work hard so we do 
not have to work. Once we were free, we simply continued to build our 
Introduction10
portfolio of the three asset classes, which are businesses, paper assets, and 
real estate, into giant portfolios. We retired young and became richer 
and richer by using all the leverage we could to build these assets. Today 
those assets produce more and more income while we work less and 
less. If you would like to do the same, this book is for you. This book 
is written to assist you in finding your own financial freedom, freedom 
from the drudgery of earning a living.
In closing, David became a giant by using all the leverage he could. 
You can do the same. This book is about bringing out the giant in you.
Boost Your Monthly Income with the Help of a 
Rich Dad Coach
EXCLUSIVE OFFER*: Act now and get 6 months FREE coaching with any new 
program and our service warranty: If you complete the participant 
requirements as outlined in your program materials and have not  
completed a personal investment action plan to achieve your financial  
goals—then, upon your request—we will extend your program time. 
We will continue to work with you at no additional charge until you complete 
your personal investment action plan.
Call today at 1-800-240-0434, and ask for ext. 7256 to take advantage of this exclusive offer 
or visit www.richdadcoaching.com/ebook  to get started. *Based on availability.

The most powerful form of leverage we have is found in 
the power of our minds. The problem with leverage is that 
leverage can work in your favor or against you. If you want to 
retire young and retire rich, the first thing you must do is use 
the power of your brain to make you rich. When it comes to 
money, too many people use the power of their brain to make 
themselves poor.
As rich dad said, “One big difference between the rich and 
the poor is that poor people say, ‘I can’t afford it,’ more often 
than rich people.” He also said, “In Sunday School I learned 
‘and the word became flesh.’” Continuing on, he said, “Poor 
people use poor words, and poor words create poor people. 
Your words do become flesh.” 
In this section, you will learn the difference between rich 
words and poor words, fast words and slow words. You will 
find out how to change your financial future by changing the 
words you use and the way you think. If you can change your 
words and your thoughts to those of the rich, retiring young 
and retiring rich will be easy.Section One  
THE LEVERAGE OF 
YOUR MIND13


Chapter One
HOW TO BECOME RICH 
AND RETIRE YOUNG15
The following is the story of how my wife Kim, my best friend 
Larry, and I began our journey from broke, to rich, to retired in less 
than 10 years. I tell this story to encourage any of you who may be 
doubtful or in need of some self-confidence to begin the journey to 
retiring young. When Kim and I started, we were nearly out of money, 
low on confidence, and filled with doubt. We all have doubts. The 
difference is what we do with those doubts.
The Journey Begins
In December of 1984, Kim, my best friend, Larry Clark, and  
I were skiing in Vancouver, British Columbia, on Whistler Mountain. 
The snow was very deep, the runs were long, and the skiing was 
excellent, although very cold. At night, the three of us sat in a little 
cabin that was snuggled in between tall pines, barely visible because 
the snow was up to the roof.
Sitting around the fire every night, we would discuss our plans for 
the future. We had very high hopes, but very little resources. Kim and 
I were on our last few dollars, and Larry was in the process of building 
another business. Our discussions ran late into the night, every night. 
We discussed books we had recently read as well as movies we had 
seen. We listened to educational tapes we had brought along and then 
discussed the lessons on those tapes in depth.
On New Year’s Day, we did what we do every year. We set our 
goals for the coming year. But this year, our goal-setting session was 
Chapter One16
different. Larry wanted to do more than just set goals for the coming 
year. He wanted us to set goals that changed our lives by changing 
our realities. He said, “Why don’t we write a plan on how we can all 
become financially free?”
I listened to his words and heard what he said. But I could not fit 
what he said into my reality. I had talked about it, dreamed about it, 
and knew that someday I would do it. But the idea of being financially 
free was always an idea in the future, not today, so the idea did not fit. 
“Financially free?” I asked. The moment I heard my voice, I knew how 
much of a wimp I had become. My voice did not sound like the old me.
“We’ve talked about it many times,” Larry said, “but I think it is 
time to stop talking, stop dreaming, and start committing. Let’s write 
it down. Once we write it down, you know we have to do it. Once we 
write it down, we’ll support each other on this journey.”
Since we were almost out of money, Kim and I looked at each other. 
The glow from the fire illuminated the doubt and uncertainty on our 
faces. “It’s a good idea, but I think I would rather just focus on surviving 
for the next year.” I had just left the nylon-and-Velcro wallet business. 
After it crashed in 1979, I spent the next five years rebuilding the 
business and then walked away from it. I walked away early because the 
business had changed drastically. We were no longer manufacturing in 
the United States. In order to compete with increasing competition, we 
had moved our factories to China, Taiwan, and Korea. I left the business 
because I could no longer stand the idea of using sweatshop child labor 
to make me rich. The business was putting money in my pocket, but 
it was taking life out of my soul. I was also not getting along with my 
partners. We had grown apart and did not see eye to eye. I walked away 
with very little equity. I just could not continue to work in a business 
that violated my spirit and with partners I could not talk to. I am not 
proud of how I left, yet I knew it was time to leave. I had been there  
for eight years and I had learned a lot. I learned how to build a business, 
how to destroy a business, and then how to rebuild it. Although  
I walked away with very little money, I did walk away with priceless 
education and experience.
Retire Young Retire Rich17
“Come on,” said Larry. “You’re being a wimp. Instead of setting 
simple one-year goals, let’s go for it. Let’s set a big multiyear goal.  
Let’s go for freedom.”
“But we don’t have much money,” I said, looking over at Kim, 
whose face reflected my concerns. “You know we’re starting over again. 
All we want to do is survive for the next six months and maybe a year. 
How can we think about financial freedom when all I can think about 
right now is financial survival?” Again I was shocked at how wimpy  
I sounded. My self-confidence was really low. My energy was really low.
“Even better. Think of this as a fresh start.” Larry was now on it.  
He would not stop.
“But how can we retire early when we don’t have any money?”  
I protested. I could hear more and more of the wimp in me coming  
out. I felt weak inside and did not want to commit to something just 
yet. I just wanted to survive for the financial short term and to not  
think about the future.
“I did not say we were going to retire in a year,” said Larry, now 
irritated with my wimpy responses. “All I am saying is, let’s plan on 
retiring now. Let’s write down the goal, create a plan, and then focus 
on the idea. Most people do not think about retiring until it’s too late, 
or they plan on retiring when they’re sixty-five. I don’t want to do that. 
I want a better plan. I don’t want to spend my life working just to pay 
bills. I want to live. I want to be rich. I want to travel the world while  
I am young enough to enjoy it.”
As I sat there listening to Larry sell me on the benefits of setting 
such a goal, I could hear the little voice inside me telling me why 
setting a goal to be financially free and retiring early was unrealistic.  
It even sounded impossible.
Larry continued. He did not seem to care if Kim or I were 
listening so I tuned him out as I began to think about what he had 
said. Silently, I said to myself, “Setting a goal to retire early is a good 
idea, so why am I fighting it? It is not like me to fight a good idea.”
Suddenly, in my silence, I began to hear my rich dad saying,  
“The biggest challenge you have is to challenge your own self-doubt 
and your laziness. It is your self-doubt and your laziness that define 
Chapter One18
and limit who you are. If you want to change who you are, you must 
take on your self-doubt and your laziness. It is your self-doubt and 
laziness that keep you small. It is your self-doubt and laziness that deny 
you the life you want.” I could hear rich dad driving home his point, 
saying, “There is no one in your way except you and your doubts. It is 
easy to stay the same. It is easy not to change. Most people choose to 
stay the same all their lives. If you will take on your self-doubt and your 
laziness, you will find the door to your freedom.”
Rich dad had had this talk with me just before I left Hawaii to come 
on this trip. He knew I was probably leaving Hawaii for good. He knew 
I was leaving my home and a place I felt very comfortable in. He knew 
I was venturing out into the world without any guarantees of security. 
Now just a month after my talk with rich dad, I found myself sitting on 
this tall snow-covered mountain, feeling weak, vulnerable, and insecure, 
listening to my best friend telling me the same things. I knew it was time 
to grow up, or give up and go home. I realized that it was this moment 
of weakness on the mountains that I had come for. It was decision time 
once again. It was time to choose. I could let my self-doubt and laziness 
win, or I could change my perceptions about myself. It was time to 
move forward or go backward.
As I tuned back into Larry talking about freedom, I realized that he 
was not really talking about freedom. At that moment, I realized that 
taking on my self-doubt and my laziness was the most important thing  
I could do. If I did not take it on, my life would go backward.
“Okay, let’s do it,” I said. “Let’s set the goal to be financially free.”
That was New Year’s Day 1985. In 1994, Kim and I were free. Larry 
went on to build his company, which became one of Inc. magazine’s 
fastest-growing companies of the year in 1996. In 1998 at the age of 46, 
Larry sold his company, retired, and took a year off.
How Did You Do It?
Whenever I tell this story, the question I am asked is, “How?  How 
did you do it?”
I then say, “It’s not about how. It is about why Kim and I did it.”  
I go on to say, “Without the why, the how would have been impossible.”
Retire Young Retire Rich19
I could tell you how Kim, Larry, and I did it, but I won’t. How we 
did it is not that important. When it comes to how we did it, all I will 
say is that, from 1985 to 1994, Kim, Larry, and I focused on rich dad’s 
three paths to great wealth, which are:
• Increasing business skills
•  Increasing money-management skills
•  Increasing investments
There are many books written on each of these paths, and if  
I did the same, this would be just another “how-to” book. But what  
I think is more important than how, is the why we did it, and the why 
is because I wanted to challenge my own self-doubts, my laziness, and 
my past. It was the why that gave us the power to do the how.
Rich dad often said, “Many people ask me how to do something.  
I used to tell them until I realized that, even after I told them how  
I did something, they often did not do it. I then realized that it was 
not the how, but why I do something that is more important. It is the 
why that gives you the power to do the how.” He also said, “The reason 
most people do not do what they can do is because they do not have a 
strong enough why. Once you find the why, it is easy to find your own 
how. Instead of looking inside themselves to find their own why for 
wanting to become rich, most people look for the easy road to wealth. 
The problem with the easy road is that it usually ends in a dead end.”
Arguing with Myself
That night, sitting in the cold mountain cabin listening to Larry,  
I found myself silently arguing with him. Every time he said, “Let’s 
set it as a goal, write it down, and create a plan,” I could hear myself 
arguing in response, saying such things as:
• “But we don’t have any money.”
• “I can’t do that.”
• “I’ll think about it next year, or once Kim and I get settled.”
• “You don’t understand our situation.”
• “I need more time.”
Chapter One20
Over the years, my rich dad had taught me many lessons. One of 
the lessons was, “If you find yourself arguing with a good idea, you may 
want to stop arguing.”
That night as Larry went on and on about getting rich and retiring 
early, I again heard rich dad warning me about arguing against a good 
idea. Explaining further, rich dad said, “Whenever someone says 
something like ‘I can’t afford it’ or ‘I can’t do it’ to something they want, 
they have a big problem. Why in the world would someone say, ‘I can’t 
afford it’ or ‘I can’t do it’ to something they want? Why would someone 
deny themselves the things they want? It makes no logical sense.”
As the fire crackled in the fireplace, I found myself arguing against 
something I wanted. “Why not retire rich and retire early?” I finally 
asked myself. “What would be wrong with that?” My mind began 
to open slowly, and I repeated silently to myself, “Why am I arguing 
against the idea? Why am I arguing against myself? It is a good idea.  
I have talked about it for years. I did want to retire by 35, and now I’m 
almost 37 years old and I’m not even close to retiring. In fact, I’m nearly 
broke. So why am I arguing?”
Once I said that to myself, I realized why I had been arguing against a 
good idea. At the age of 25, I had planned on becoming rich and retiring 
between the ages of thirty to thirty-five. It was my dream. But after losing 
my Velcro wallet business the first time, my spirit was crushed and I had 
lost much of my self-confidence. That night sitting by the fire, I realized it 
was my lack of self-confidence that was doing the arguing. I was arguing 
against a dream I wanted. I was arguing because I did not want to feel 
disappointed again. I was arguing because I was protecting myself from 
the pain that dreaming big dreams can bring if that big dream does not 
become reality. I had dreamed and failed. That night I realized that I was 
arguing against failing again, not against the dream.
“Okay, let’s set a big goal,” I said quietly to Larry. I had finally 
stopped arguing against a good idea. The argument was still there, but 
I was not going to let the argument stop me. After all, it was only an 
argument I was having with myself and no one else. The little person 
inside me was arguing against the person who wanted to grow up and  
be bigger.
Retire Young Retire Rich21
“Good,” said Larry. “It’s about time you stopped being such a 
wimp. I was really getting worried about you.”
The reason I had decided to do it was because I had found my why. 
I knew why I was going to do it, even though at that moment I did not 
know how I was going to do it.
Why I Decided to Retire Early
How many of you have ever said to yourself, “I am sick and tired of 
myself”? Well that New Year’s Eve, sitting around the fire with Kim and 
Larry, I got sick and tired of my old self and decided to change. It was 
not just a mental change. It was a change that came from deep inside.  
It was time for a big change, and I knew I could change because I found 
out why I wanted to change. The following are some of my personal 
whys—why I decided to go for retiring young and retiring rich:
•  I was fed up with being broke and always struggling for money. 
I had been rich for a brief moment with my wallet business, 
but after the business crashed, I was back to struggling again. 
Although my rich dad had taught me well, I still only had his 
lessons. I had still not become rich, and it was time for me to 
become rich.
• I was tired of being average. Through school, teachers said, 
“Robert is a bright boy, but he just does not apply himself.” 
They also said, “He’s bright, but he’ll never be as smart as the 
gifted kids. He is just above average.” That night sitting on  
the mountain, I got sick and tired of being average. It was  
time for me to stop being average.
• When I was eight years old, I came home and found my mom 
crying at the kitchen table. She was crying because we were 
buried under a mountain of bills. My dad was doing the best 
he could to earn more money, but as a schoolteacher, he wasn’t 
doing so well financially. All he would say was, “Don’t worry. 
I’ll handle it.” But he didn’t. The way my dad handled it was 
by going back to school, working harder, and waiting for his 
annual pay raise. Meanwhile, the bills kept piling up, and my 
Chapter One22
mom felt more and more alone with no one to turn to. My 
dad did not like to discuss the subject of money, and if he did, 
he only got angry.
• I remember deciding at the age of eight to find the answers 
that could help my mom. That night sitting on the mountain, 
I realized that I had found the answers I had searched for since 
the age of eight. It was now time to take those answers and 
turn them into reality.
• The most painful why of all was the reality that I now had a 
beautiful young woman in my life, Kim. I had met my soul 
mate, and she was in this financial mess because she loved me. 
That night on the mountain, I realized that I was doing to Kim 
what my dad had done to my mom. I was repeating a family 
pattern. At that moment, I found my real why.
So those are my whys. I wrote them down that night and kept 
them in a secret place. For those of you who read my second book, 
Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant , you may recall that things got   
worse for us once we left the mountain. I started that book by telling 
the story of Kim and me living in a car for about three weeks after our 
money ran out. So things did not get better just because we made the 
decision to retire rich, but it was the reasons why that kept us going.
Things did not go well for Larry either after leaving the mountain. 
He too had substantial financial setbacks in the late 1980s, yet his whys 
kept him going.
I found out, as my rich dad did, that I cannot tell anyone  how 
to get rich. I now first ask people why they want to become 
rich. Without a strong enough why, even the easiest how to get 
rich will be too hard. There are many, many ways to get rich, 
but there are only a few personal reasons  why you want to get 
rich. Find your why, and then you will find your how. As the 
old saying goes, “Where there is a will, there is a way.” For me, 
finding my will made finding my  way possible. Without the 
will, the way would have been way too hard.
Retire Young Retire Rich23
A suggestion: I learned years ago that passion is a combination 
of love and hate. Unless someone has a passion for something, it is 
difficult to accomplish anything. Rich dad used to say, “If you want 
something, be passionate. Passion gives energy to your life. If you want 
something you do not have, find out why you love what you want and 
why you hate not having what you want. When you combine those 
two thoughts, you will find the energy to get off your seat and go get 
anything you want.”
So you may want to start with a list comparing loves and hates.  
For example, I would create the following list:
Love Hate
Being rich Being poor
Being free Being required to work
Buying anything I want Not having what I want
Expensive things Cheap things
Having other people do                Doing things I don’t  
what I don’t want to do           want to do  
 
My suggestion is, you may want to start your list of loves and hates 
in the space listed below. If you need more space, which I hope you 
do, find a much larger sheet of paper. May you live your life with more 
and more passion.
        Your Loves          Your Hates
 
 
Chapter One24
So sit quietly to find and define your loves and hates. Then 
write down your whys. Write down your dreams, goals, and plans 
on becoming financially free, retiring early, and retiring as young as 
possible. Once it is in writing, you may want to show it to a friend 
who will support you in achieving your dreams. Take a look at this 
paper with your dreams, goals, and plans on a regular basis, talk about 
it often, ask for support, be willing to continually learn, and before 
you know it, things will begin to happen.
As a final comment, I have heard many people say, “Money does 
not make you happy.” That statement has some truth to it. But what 
money does do is buy me the time to do what I love, and pay other 
people to do what I hate doing.
Chapter Two
RETIRE AS YOUNG  
AS YOU CAN25
After nearly ten years of hard work and struggle, I had become 
financially free at the age of forty-seven. That year, in 1994, a friend called 
and said, “Be sure you take at least a year off after the business is sold.”
“A year off?” I replied. “I’m going to retire and take the rest of my 
life off.”
“No you won’t,” said my friend Nyhl. Nyhl had been a member 
of the team that started and built several major businesses, two of 
them being MTV and CMT, Country Music Television, back in the 
early 1980s. After having built and sold some of those businesses, he 
retired at the age of forty-one. We had become friends, and he was 
now passing on his lessons from retirement to me. “In less than three 
months, you’ll be bored and you’ll start another company,” he said. 
“The hardest thing for you to do is to do nothing. That’s why  
I recommend you set a goal to wait at least a year before even  
thinking about starting another business.”
I laughed and tried to reassure him that I was retired for good. 
“I have no plans on starting another business,” I said. “I’m retired. 
I’m not going back to work. The next time you’ll see me you won’t 
recognize me. I won’t have a suit on nor will I have short hair. I’m 
going to look like a beach bum.”
Nyhl heard my words, yet he was insistent. He wanted me to hear 
and understand what he was trying to tell me. It was important to him 
that I understand his message. After a very long conversation, he was 
Chapter T wo26
beginning to get through to me. Finally I heard him when he said, 
“Very few people have the opportunity you have. Not many people are 
financially able to stop working and do nothing. Not many people can 
truly retire in midlife, during your prime earning years. Most people 
can’t afford to stop working, even if they want to. Even if they hate 
their job, they can’t stop working. So don’t take this gift lightly. It is a 
gift few people will ever be presented with, so take it. Take a year to  
do nothing.”
Nyhl went on to explain that most entrepreneurs sell their 
businesses and start another business right away. He said, “I used to 
build a business, sell it, and start immediately building another one.  
I had built and sold three businesses by the time I was thirty-five.  
I had a lot of money, but I could not stop working. I did not know 
what stopping meant. If I was not working, I felt useless and felt  
I was wasting time, so I would work harder. My hard work was 
robbing me of life and time with my family. Finally I realized what  
I was doing and decided to do something different. After I sold my last 
business and put the check for millions in the bank, I decided I would 
take a year off. Taking that year for my family and me was one of the 
best decisions I have ever made. That time alone with myself, having 
nothing to do, was priceless. Do you realize that we were in school 
studying since we were five years old? And once we left school, we’ve 
been working. Very few people have the luxury of at least one year to 
sit and just think and be with yourself.”
He told me that as soon as his affairs at home were tied up, he and 
his family moved to a remote island in Fiji and sat on the beach. He 
said, “For months, I just sat on the beach, gazed at the crystal blue 
ocean, and watched my kids enjoy a life we all dream about.” Once 
they had had enough of Fiji, he moved his family to Italy and sat there 
for months doing nothing. “It was a full year before I became a sane 
human being again,” he said. “I had no idea how hard it would be 
to stop waking up and thinking I had something to do, a meeting to 
attend or a plane to catch, in order to make enough money to pay the 
bills. It took a full year for me to slow down and let the adrenaline 
Retire Young Retire Rich27
leave my body. It took a full year of relaxing to slow down enough so  
I could think straight and become whole again. I was 41 years old. For 
36 years, I had been running to get somewhere, and now I was there.”
 
The Hardest Thing I Had to Do
Nyhl was correct. The hardest thing about being retired was having 
nothing to do. After years of school, classrooms, tests, meetings, 
airplanes, and deadlines, I was truly conditioned to get up and rush 
off to do something. Just before retiring, I remember how I hated the 
pressure and the worry of work. I remember thinking, “Only six more 
months and I will be free. I can retire and do nothing. I can’t wait until 
the business is sold and I can stop this madness.”
In September of 1994, the sale and transfer of assets out of the 
business were complete. I put some money in the bank, invested in 
a few more apartment houses and warehouses, and formally retired. 
I was forty-seven and my wife, Kim, was thirty-seven. We were 
financially free with the rest of our lives yet to live and enjoy. And just 
as Nyhl warned, within weeks after selling the business, I was restless. 
I continued to wake up early, only to realize that I had no plans for 
the day. I had no one to call, and no one called me. I was alone in 
my house with nowhere to go. I was soon restless and irritable. I felt 
useless and unwanted. I felt like my life was being wasted and I was 
unproductive. I wanted desperately to work on something, but there 
was nothing for me to do. Nyhl was correct. For me, having nothing 
to do was the hardest thing to do.
Kim had her business of investing and managing her real estate 
portfolio. She enjoyed it and went about it at her own pace. She would 
find me in the kitchen, bumping around trying to do nothing. “Are 
you looking for something to do?” she would ask.
“No,” I replied. “I’m just looking for a way to do nothing.”
“Well, let me know when you find nothing to do and we can do it 
together,” Kim said with a grin. “Why don’t you call your friends and 
get together and do something?”
Chapter T wo28
“I did,” I replied. “But they’re all busy at work. They don’t have 
any free time.”
After a few months of trying to do nothing, Kim and I decided to 
vacation in Fiji where Nyhl went for part of his year off. I was excited 
about just going somewhere, even if it was to just do nothing.
Within three weeks of deciding to go to Fiji, we arrived by 
seaplane and were greeted by smiling Fijians with flower leis and 
tropical drinks. As Kim and I walked down the long pier that jutted 
out over the crystal blue water, I thought I had arrived on Fantasy 
Island and was waiting to hear a short chubby guy say, “Boss, de plane, 
de plane.”
This island was more beautiful than Nyhl had described. I could 
not believe its beauty. Being raised in Hawaii, I could not help but say 
to myself, “This is the way Hawaii used to be and this is how Hawaii 
should be.” Yet as fabulous as this secluded island was, it was too slow 
for me. I could not believe that paradise was making me crazy. I would 
get up, have a healthy breakfast of fruit, jog for a while, and then 
spend the day at the beach. After an hour, I was stir-crazy. As beautiful 
as the beaches of this island were, I was ready to get back to the States 
and start a new business. I did not know why I had promised Nyhl 
that I would take at least a year off. T wo weeks were all that I could 
take of paradise. Kim could have stayed forever, but I was ready to get 
home to Arizona. Why I needed to get home, I do not know, but we 
left paradise and headed home.
Sitting at home was not much better than sitting on the beach, but 
at least I had my car and familiar places to keep me distracted. A new 
neighbor came over to introduce himself one day. He too was retired 
but he was about 20 years older than I was. He was 68 years old and 
had been a high-profile manager of a Fortune 500 company. Every day 
he would come over and talk about the news, weather, and sports. He 
was a nice guy, but sitting around trying to do nothing with him was 
worse than the worst meetings I had ever been in. All he wanted to do 
was work in his backyard and play golf. To him, retirement was pure 
heaven. He did not miss the corporate world at all and just loved his 
Retire Young Retire Rich29
free time doing nothing. I realized that I would wind up like him if  
I hung around him much longer. When he wanted me to join his 
men’s card group at the country club, I realized that I had to find 
something else to do in order to do nothing.
Finally, I could take no more. One day I said to Kim, “I’m 
moving to Bisbee. I need to go somewhere where I can be busy doing 
nothing.” In a few days, I moved to the small ranch that Kim and  
I owned. It is a beautiful yet secluded piece of land, hidden in a valley, 
covered with tall oak trees, an intermittent stream, with lots of deer 
and an occasional mountain lion, nestled high in the mountains on 
the Mexico/New Mexico/Arizona border. I had finally found my place 
to take my year off, a place where I could be busy doing nothing. 
After a few days of just sitting in the mountains in my cabin without 
television or radio reception, I began to calm down and settle into my 
year off. My breathing slowed down and so did my pace. Peace and 
tranquility became a part of everyday life, rather than the pressure of 
meetings and deadlines. My year off had finally begun, and it was as 
Nyhl said, “A gift few people will ever be presented with, so take it.” 
It had taken me nearly six months to slow down enough to begin my 
year off.
Starting Life Over Again
Sitting alone in my mountain cabin, I had the time to reflect on 
my life. I thought of all the stupid and impulsive things I had done in 
my youth. I thought about the choices I made and how each choice, 
even though not a brilliant choice, had been important in shaping 
who I eventually became in life. I had the time to sit and remember 
my high school days and the friends I grew up with, friends I rarely 
see today. I recalled my friends from college and wondered how they 
were doing. This time alone gave me the opportunity to reflect on how 
much the friends of my youth impacted the man I had become.
There were so many moments sitting in my cabin that I wished  
I could go back in time and be with my boyhood friends again.  
I wanted just to laugh and be young again, but now all I had were  
Chapter T wo30
the precious memories. I wished I had taken more pictures and written 
more letters and kept in touch more, but we had all become busy 
with life and had gone our separate ways. Sitting in the mountains in 
front of a roaring fire, playing back the memories of my youth was 
better than going to a movie theater. The time off gave me the time 
and the solitude to replay in vivid detail the memories of my past. 
It is interesting that even the bad times didn’t seem that bad. I came 
to appreciate my life, the people in my life, the good and the bad. 
As messed up as my life was at times, I greatly appreciated my own 
unique life.
In those quiet moments, I realized that we all have the potential to 
be good and bad. We all have the potential to be great, but greatness 
was not to be a part of my youth. I was not a child genius, a musical 
prodigy, an athletic star, nor was I in the “in crowd” or invited to 
many parties. In looking back upon my life, I realized my life was 
average, but sitting in the mountains made my average life seem very 
special to me.
I had time to think about my family, old friends, guys I played 
sports with, old girlfriends, and old business partners. I thought about 
choices I had made and wondered what would have happened if I had 
made different choices—choices such as, what would have happened if 
I had married my girlfriend from college, settled down, and had kids, 
as she wanted to do? What would have happened to my life if I had 
not decided to become a pilot and fly in Vietnam? What would have 
happened if I had avoided the war as most of my friends did? What 
would have happened if I had gone for my master’s degree instead 
of starting my nylon-and-Velcro wallet business? What would have 
happened if I had not lost two businesses before finally having one 
succeed? What would have happened if I had not met Kim and gotten 
married? What if Kim had not stuck it out with me when times were 
really bad? And most importantly, what did I learn and who did I 
become because of the successes and failures my life had presented me?
Retire Young Retire Rich31
It is true that you cannot change your past, but you can change 
your opinion of your past. Up until this time in the mountains, my 
past was just a blur. It was just a series of people and events that 
whirred by as I rushed through each day of my life. The solitude in the 
mountains gave me the opportunity to stop my life and take a look at 
it. There are many things I have done in the past that I am not proud 
of and would not do again. There are many mistakes I wish I had 
not made and lies I wish I had not told. There are many dear friends 
and loved ones that I hurt along the way. There are many people I 
love dearly but I do not talk to anymore because we disagreed on 
something silly. During this year off, I found out how important those 
events were in my life. Sitting alone in the quiet of the mountains, 
I reconnected with my past friends, family, and myself and thanked 
them all for being a part of my life. Sitting alone in the mountains, I 
had the time to say “thank you” to my past and prepare for the future.
Today when I speak to groups about taking a year off, I say, “The 
best thing about retiring early and taking that year off in midlife was 
that it gave me a chance to start life over again.”
Eighteen months after selling my business and retiring, I finally 
drove out of the mountains of southern Arizona. As I left, I 
really did not know what I was going to do next. I just knew 
that I wanted to do things differently. In my Apple Macintosh 
computer was the rough draft of Rich Dad Poor Dad  and in my 
briefcase was a rough sketch of my CASHFLOW® 101  game. 
The second half of my life had begun. This time it was my life. 
It was no longer a life driven by the wishes and dreams of my 
parents, teachers, friends, or the dreams of a child. I was now 
older, wiser, smarter, less reckless, and a bit more trustworthy. 
The second half of my life had begun, and this time it was to be 
my life on my terms.
And that is the main reason I recommend retiring as young as 
possible. It will give you a chance to start your life over.
Chapter T wo32
A suggestion: Regardless if you can retire early or not, I suggest 
taking at least an hour each month to reflect on your life.
Taking the time to reflect on my life I discovered that:
• What I thought was important was not that important.
• What was important was where I was at, not where  
 I was going.
• There is no one more important than the person in front of   
 you at that moment. Take that moment to be with him or her.
• Time is precious. Don’t waste it. Appreciate it.
• Sometimes stopping for a moment is harder than staying busy.
For me, the best thing about retiring early was learning to 
appreciate life, even if it was hectic, stressful, and filled with problems. 
I found out that I did not know what to do if I had nothing to do. 
Today, I truly appreciate the hustle and bustle of life because I know 
what it is like to sit around doing nothing. So whatever state your life 
is in at present, take a moment to appreciate it, because tomorrow it 
will only be a memory.
Chapter Three
HOW I RETIRED EARLY33
In the spring of 1999, I was scheduled to give a talk to a group of 
approximately 250 bankers in Los Angeles. Since I was to be the first 
speaker in the morning, I flew in the night before from Phoenix, where 
I live. After having breakfast, I sat in my hotel room and scratched my 
head as to what I could say to this group of bankers. My standard talk 
about financial statements, financial literacy, and the differences between 
an asset and a liability seemed inadequate for this group. Since they were 
not just ordinary bankers, but mortgage  bankers, I assumed they would 
know the financial basics I most often talk about. Or at least I hoped 
they did.
My talk was scheduled for 9:30 that morning. It was now 8:00, and 
I was still at a loss for an angle or a new idea appropriate for the group. 
Sitting at the desk in my hotel room, I glanced at the complimentary 
morning newspaper the hotel had provided. On the front page was 
a photograph of a happy couple sitting in their golf cart. The bold 
headline over the picture read, “We Decided to Retire Early.”
The article went on to explain that this couple’s 401(k) retirement 
plan had done so well over the past ten years in this booming stock 
market that they decided to retire six years earlier than planned. He 
was fifty-nine years old and she was fifty-six. The article quoted them as 
saying, “Our mutual funds have done so well that we realized one day 
we were millionaires. Instead of working for six more years, we scaled 
back, sold our home, bought a smaller home in this retirement village, 
put the extra money from the sale of our house in a high-yield certificate 
of deposit, reduced our expenses, and now we play golf every day.”
Chapter Three34
I had found the subject for my talk. Finishing the article, I showered, 
dressed, and headed down to the waiting mortgage bankers. At exactly 
9:30, I was introduced and brought up onstage. Lifting the newspaper up 
in the air, I opened my talk by pointing to the picture of the newly retired 
couple and repeating the headline, “We decided to retire early.” I then 
stated the couple’s ages, 59 and 56, and read a few comments from the 
article. Putting the paper down, I said, “My wife, Kim, and I also retired 
early. We retired in 1994. I was forty-seven and she was thirty-seven.” 
I looked around the room and allowed the difference in ages and dates 
to sink in. After a silence of about ten seconds, I continued asking, “So 
let me ask you this: How is it that I could retire 12 years earlier than he 
could and my wife 19 years earlier? What made the difference?”
The silence was deafening. I was off to a bad start. I knew it was 
early and I knew that I was asking the audience to think instead of just 
listen. I knew that I probably sounded arrogant and cocky, comparing 
my early retirement to the couple in the newspaper. Yet I wanted to make 
a point to this group and it was too late to turn back. I felt like a stand-
up comedian who had just told his best joke, and the audience was not 
laughing. Pushing on, I asked, “How many of you plan on retiring early?”
Again there was no response. No one raised a hand. The discomfort 
in the room was growing. I was dying onstage. I knew I had to do 
something quickly. Looking out on the group, I could see that most of 
the group were younger than I was. The few that were my age were not 
impressed with my talk about retiring young. Quickly I asked, “How 
many of you are under forty-five?”
Suddenly there was life. There was response. Slowly hands were raised 
from all around the room. I estimated that about 60 percent of the group 
raised their hands, indicating that they were younger than forty-five. It 
was a young crowd, relative to me at least. Changing my tactics, I then 
played to this group, asking, “How many of you would like to retire in 
your forties and be financially free for the rest of your life?”
Now the hands were shooting up with more enthusiasm. I was 
beginning to communicate a little better, and the audience seemed 
to be coming to life. The participants of my age and older began to 
squirm as they looked around at their younger peers, many of whom 
Retire Young Retire Rich35
had their hands in the air, indicating that they did not want want to 
grow old in the industry. Sensing the discomfort of those my age and 
older, I realized that I needed to say something quickly to not alienate 
this group.
Smiling, I paused as the hands came down. Looking at the older 
bankers in the group, I said, “I want to thank the mortgage bankers 
of this world because you were the ones who made it possible for 
me to retire early—not my real estate broker or my stockbroker, 
not my financial planner, and not my accountants. It was you, the 
mortgage bankers of the world, who made it possible for me to retire 
approximately 20 years earlier than my father.”
Looking out at the audience, I could tell that some of the 
uneasiness was dissipating, and I could now continue on with my  
talk. My acknowledgment of their industry seemed to have helped.  
I estimated that I now had about 80 percent of the audience’s 
attention. Continuing, I repeated the question I had asked earlier,  
“So how is it that I could retire earlier than the couple in the 
newspaper, and how did you mortgage bankers help me retire early?”
Again there was silence. I began to realize that they did not know 
how they helped me. Even though there was that same dead silence, 
at least they seemed to be more awake than they were a few minutes 
earlier. Deciding to stop asking a question that they were hesitant to 
answer, I continued. T urning to my flip chart on stage, I wrote in big 
bold letters:
Returning to the audience, I pointed to the word  debt and said,  
“I was able to retire early because I used debt to fund my retirement. 
And this couple in the newspaper, the people with the 401(k), used 
equity to fund their retirement. That is why they took longer to retire.”DEBT
vs.
EQUITY
Chapter Three36
Pausing for a moment, I let what I had just said sink in. Finally 
a hand popped up and asked, “So you’re saying that the guy in the 
newspaper used  his money to retire and you used our money to retire?”
“That is correct,” I said. “I was using your money to get deeper in 
debt, and he was trying to get out of debt.”
“So that is why it took him 12 years longer than you,” another 
person said. “It took him longer because he used his money, his own 
equity to retire.”
Eighteen Years of Life
I smiled, nodded my head, and said, “And for me, retiring at age  
47 gave me 18 years of extra life when compared to someone who retires 
at age sixty-five. And how much is 18 years of life worth to you, 18 years 
of your youth? For my wife, it was 28 years of extra time to enjoy her 
youth. How many of you would rather retire early so you can enjoy your 
youth, your vitality, and the freedom to do whatever you want with all the 
money you need?”
Hands went up all over the room. There were now more smiles 
attached to those arms. People seemed to be coming to life. Yet, as 
expected, there were those sitting with their arms folded across their chests 
and legs crossed over their knees. My talk did not seem to be too well 
received by those individuals. The cynics and skeptics wanted to be cynics 
and skeptics. I did not seem to be reaching them. At least I was saving 
myself from a very bad start and some of the group was coming over to 
my side.
A young man in the front row raised his hand and asked, “Would you 
mind explaining a little more about how you retired early using debt, and 
how the other guy used equity?”
“Certainly,” I said, happy to have the opportunity to explain further. 
Picking up the newspaper and pointing to the picture, I said, “This 
person retired six years ahead of schedule, if age 65 is the benchmark for 
retirement, because the stock market did well. So he did well because he 
invested his own money into the market. How much better would he have 
done if he had borrowed your bank’s money and invested  your money into 
the same market?”
Retire Young Retire Rich37
A rush of uneasiness went through the audience. What I had just said 
had disturbed many in the audience. The young man, now with  
a puzzled look on his face, then said, “But we would not lend him  
our money to invest in the stock market.”
“Why not?” I asked.
“Because it’s too risky,” he said.
Nodding, I said, “And because it’s too risky, this retiree had to use his 
own money, his equity. His retirement plan, his 401(k), did well and so 
did his own stock picking. He did well because the market did well. The 
stock market did well because millions of people, just like him, were doing 
the same thing at the same time, so he retired early. But he took longer 
because he basically used his own money, his equity, to buy equity in 
other investments. Interestingly, he invested in investments your industry 
generally does not lend money to invest in because of the risk factor. You 
bankers don’t lend people money to speculate in the stock market, do you?”
Most in the room shook their heads.
“So are you saying he got lucky?” another person asked.
“Well, he was in the right place at the right age and in the right 
cycle of the market,” I said. “If and when the trend reverses, he 
might wish he had not retired so early.”
“And you used our money to invest in what?” asked another 
participant.
“Real estate,” I said. “What else do you lend money on? You are 
mortgage bankers, aren’t you? You’re not investment bankers, are you?”
The young man nodded his head and said quietly, “We are mortgage 
bankers and we lend money for real estate, not stocks, bonds, and 
mutual funds.”
“But didn’t the stock market go up in value more than real estate in the 
last ten years?” asked a young woman sitting a few rows back from the front 
row. “My 401(k) did far better than most of the real estate investments I 
have seen.”
“That may be true,” I replied. “But your 401(k) increased in value 
because of market momentum and capital appreciation. Do you make it a 
policy to invest in market momentum or possible capital appreciation?”
“Not as a policy,” said the young woman.
Chapter Three38
“Neither do I,” I said. “I do not invest for capital appreciation 
only. The values of my properties do not need to appreciate in value 
for me to make money, although some have appreciated greatly in 
the same period of time and none has gone down in value like many 
stocks and mutual funds have.”
“So if you do not invest for capital appreciation, what do you 
invest for?” asked the young woman.
“I invest for cash flow,” I said quietly. “How much cash flow per 
month does your 401(k) put into your pocket to spend each month?”
“Well, nothing,” said the young woman. “The purpose of my 
retirement plan is to have all the capital appreciation grow tax free so 
all my money stays in my retirement account. It is not designed to give 
me monthly cash flow.”
“And do you own any investment real estate that gives you 
monthly cash flow plus tax breaks?” I asked.
“No,” said the young woman. “All I have is an investment plan 
that invests in mutual funds.”
“And you’re a mortgage banker?” I asked with a teasing smile.
“Let me get this straight,” said the young woman. “You borrowed 
our money to buy your real estate. Each month that real estate returns 
cash flow to you. You and your wife were able to retire early because 
you have cash flow while the rest of us are hoping for the capital 
appreciation of our mutual funds and hoping to retire later in life, 
hoping that the market does not crash when it is our turn to retire. In 
other words, we helped you retire early, but we do not help ourselves?”
“That may be one way of looking at it,” I replied. “And that is 
why I am here to thank you and your industry for contributing to my 
retirement fund. You have contributed millions so I could retire early.  
I would like to have you think about doing the same for yourself.”
My time was soon up and I received a courteous applause as I left 
the stage. The room was now awake, and there seemed to be some 
excitement about what I had to say, especially from the young people. 
As I walked through the crowd shaking hands, I got a chance to listen 
to some of the comments about my talk. Even though they were 
Retire Young Retire Rich39
mortgage bankers, I could still hear the usual comments I always hear 
from any crowd, such as:
• “What he says is far too risky.”
• “I would never lend him any money.”
• “He doesn’t know what he is talking about.”
• “You can’t do that today. The market is different.”
• “He got lucky. Just wait till the market crashes and he comes   
 begging to us on his knees.”
• “I don’t fix toilets. That is why I don’t own any real estate.”
• “The real estate market is overbuilt. It will soon crash.”
• “You know how many guys like him have been wiped out in   
 real estate?”
• “If his debt is so high, I would not lend him any money.” 
• “If he is retired, why is he talking to us?”
Poor Dad’s Lessons
My poor dad often advised, “Go to school, get good grades, find 
a safe secure job, work hard, and save money.” He would also quote 
other famous lines such as, “Neither a borrower nor a lender be,” and 
“A penny saved is a penny earned,” or “If you can’t afford something, 
don’t buy it. Always pay cash.”
My poor dad’s life would have been pretty good if he had followed 
his own advice. But, like many people, he said what he thought were 
the right words, but he did not do the right things. He borrowed 
money to buy his house and his cars. He never invested because he 
always said, “Investing is risky.” Instead he tried to save money, but 
each time there was an emergency, he would take the money out of his 
savings. He borrowed money for things that made him poor, and he 
refused to borrow money for things that might have made him rich. 
These subtle differences made a lot of difference in his life. Because of 
Chapter Three40
his lifelong ways of thinking and handling money, he could not afford 
to retire at age sixty-five. It also explains why he had to work up until 
the day he was too ill with cancer to work anymore. He worked hard 
all his life and for the last six months of his life, he fought for his life 
in a cancer ward. He was a good, hardworking man, who spent his life 
working hard, trying to avoid debt, and trying to save money. And 
those were the lessons about life and money he tried to pass on to me.
Rich Dad’s Lessons
My rich dad, the man who was my best friend’s father, offered 
different advice and different ways of thinking about money. He would 
say and ask such things as:
• “How long would it take you to  save $1 million?” He would 
then ask, “How long would it take you to borrow $1 million?”
• “Who is going to get richer in the long run? Someone who 
works all his life trying to save a million dollars? Or someone 
who knows how to borrow a million dollars at 10 percent 
interest and also knows how to invest it and receive a 25 percent 
per year return on that borrowed million dollars?”
• “To whom would a banker rather lend money? Someone who 
works hard for money, or someone who knows how to borrow 
money and have that money safely and intelligently work hard 
for them?”
• “Who would you have to be and what would you have to 
know in order to call your banker and say, ‘I want to borrow a 
million dollars,’ and then have the banker say, ‘I will have the 
papers ready for you to sign in 20 minutes’?”
• “Why does the government tax your savings but give you a tax 
break for being in debt?”
• “Who has to be financially smarter and more financially 
educated? A person with a million dollars in savings or a 
person with a million dollars in debt?”
Retire Young Retire Rich41
• “Who has to be financially smarter with money? Someone who 
works hard for money or someone who has money work hard 
for him?”
• “If you had a choice of education, would you choose to go to 
school to learn how to work hard for money, or would you 
rather go to school to learn how to have money work hard  
for you?”
• “Why is it that a banker will gladly lend you money to 
speculate in real estate, but will not lend you money to 
speculate in the stock market?”
• “Why do the people who work the hardest and save the most 
pay more in taxes than people who work less and borrow more?”
When it came to work, money, savings, and debt, it is obvious that 
my two dads had completely different points of view. But the biggest 
difference in points of view was this statement by my rich dad: “The 
poor and middle class have a hard time getting rich because they try  
to use their own money to get rich. If you want to get rich, you need 
to know how to use other people’s money to get rich, not your own.”
A word of caution and warning:  This book is not about 
borrowing money and getting into deep debt, although I  
will discuss the use of debt as a tool for retiring early and 
retiring rich. Leverage is power, and power can be used, 
abused, or feared. We should treat debt as we would a loaded 
gun, very carefully. Debt, like a loaded gun, can help you or  
it can kill you, regardless of who’s handling it. T reat all debt as 
dangerous, just as you should consider all guns dangerous.
I emphasize this because a young man wrote on my website that he 
had just quit his job, taken out several credit cards, and gotten deeply 
in debt buying real estate. He said, “I am following Robert’s advice and 
getting deeply in debt with good debt.”
Chapter Three42
First of all, I would never advise anyone to use credit cards to buy 
real estate. If you know how to invest, you do not need to use such a 
risky scheme of financing your investing.
Although I know people who have invested in real estate using 
credit cards, I do not recommend this process, as it can be very 
dangerous. I do not recommend the process because I know many 
more people who have used credit cards to buy real estate who have 
gone broke. What I do advise is to get educated and learn how to use 
debt wisely.
While I started this chapter talking about the difference between 
debt versus equity, this book is not just about debt. This book is about 
a more important subject for anyone who wants to retire young and 
retire rich.
The Second Most Important Word
Rich dad always said, “The most important words in the world 
of money are cash flow . The second most important word is  leverag e.” 
When I spoke to the mortgage bankers about using their money to 
retire early, I was really speaking about using their money as leverage. 
As a child learning from my rich dad, he spent much of his time 
teaching his son and me about the importance of leverage.
As I mentioned earlier, rich dad’s favorite story of leverage was the 
story of David and Goliath. Rich dad would tell this story to us as often 
as we would listen. He would say, “Always remember, boys, that David 
beat Goliath because David understood the principle of leverage.”
“I thought he used a slingshot,” I said.
“That is correct,” said rich dad. “In the right hands, a slingshot 
is one form of leverage. Once you begin to understand the power of 
leverage, you will see it everywhere. If you want to be rich, you must 
learn to harness the power of leverage.” Rich dad also drummed into 
our heads, “Even if you are just little guys in the world, you can beat 
the big guys if you understand the power of leverage.”
As we got older, rich dad had to find other examples of leverage. 
In order to make his lessons about money interesting to his son, 
Retire Young Retire Rich43
Mike, and me he would often use subjects that we were interested 
in to teach us his lessons. For example, when the Beatles first came 
to America in the 1960s and the kids of my age were going wild, 
my rich dad was impressed at how much money they were making. 
During this lesson he said, “The reason the Beatles make more money 
is because they have more leverage.” Rich dad went on to explain that 
the Beatles made more money than the president of the United States, 
medical doctors, lawyers, accountants, and even himself because of 
the financial principle of leverage. Rich dad said, “The Beatles use 
television, radio, and records as leverage. That is why they are rich.”
It was his son, Mike, who asked, “Are television, radio, and records 
the only form of leverage?”
“Do we have to become rock stars to become rich?” I asked. I was 
16 at the time and knew that singing was not my strong suit. The only 
instrument I could play was the radio.
Rich dad laughed and said, “No you don’t have to become rock 
stars to be rich, and no, television, radio, and records are not the only 
forms of leverage. But if you want to become rich, you have to use 
some form of leverage. The difference between the rich, the poor, and 
the middle class is the different forms of leverage each class uses. The 
rich are richer simply because they use different forms of leverage, and 
they use more of it.”
This Book Is About Leverage
Rich dad would repeatedly say to his son and me, “Financial leverage 
is the advantage the rich have over the poor and the middle class.” He 
would also say, “Financial leverage is how the rich get richer faster.” 
The first books in the Rich Dad series focused on cash flow. This 
book will focus more closely on the word  leverage  because in order for 
you to retire young and retire rich, you will need to use some form of 
leverage. It was leverage, not hard work, that allowed Kim and me to 
retire early. The next chapter will go into a few more examples of leverage . 
Chapter Three44
 I started this chapter with the story of my talk to the mortgage 
bankers and how I used their money rather than my own 
money to retire early. That was an example of using debt as a 
form of leverage.
 The problem with leverage is that it is like a two-edged sword 
which can cut in either direction. In other words, a person can 
use leverage to get ahead financially, but that same leverage,  
if misused, can cause them to fall behind financially.
 One of the main reasons the middle class and the poor work 
harder, work years longer, struggle to pay off debt, and pay 
more in taxes is because they lack a very important form of 
leverage—the leverage of financial education. So before you 
run out and borrow money to invest in assets, please know 
that debt is only one form of leverage and that all forms of 
leverage have a sharp edge on two sides. To repeat something 
my rich dad said:
 “Who has to be financially smarter and more financially 
educated? A person who has a million dollars in savings 
or a person who has a million dollars in debt?”
The most important point I want to make is that this book 
is primarily about financial education. Regardless of what 
form of leverage you use, I first recommend the education 
on how to use whatever form of leverage interests you.
A suggestion:  Rich dad said, “If you want to be rich, you need 
to know the differences between good debt and bad debt, good 
expenses and bad expenses, good income and bad income, and 
good liabilities and bad liabilities.”
Since this chapter is specifically about debt as a form of leverage, 
you may want to make a list of your good debt and bad debt. If you 
are not familiar with the distinctions between these concepts, good 
debt is debt that puts money in your pocket every month, and bad  
 
Retire Young Retire Rich45
debt is debt that takes money out of your pocket every month. For 
example, the debt on my apartment houses puts money in my pocket 
every month, and the debt on my residence (my mortgage) takes 
money from my pocket every month.
      Good Debt       Bad Debt
After you inspect your list, you may want to think about what you 
want to do with your debt. You may want to reduce bad debt and increase 
good debt. If you work on increasing good debt, your chances of retiring 
young and retiring rich are greatly improved. But always remember to 
treat all debt as you would treat a loaded gun—very carefully.

Chapter Four
HOW YOU CAN 
RETIRE EARLY47
Having two dads allowed me to see two different worlds of 
leverage. My real dad was a highly educated, hardworking man.  
My rich dad was a highly leveraged man. That is why he worked  
less and earned far more than my poor dad. If you want to retire 
early and retire rich, it is very important to understand the principle  
of leverage.
In the broad definition of the word, the word leverage simply 
means the ability to do more with less . When it came to the subject 
of work, money, and leverage, rich dad would say, “If you want to 
become rich, you need to work less, and earn more. In order to 
do that, you employ some form of leverage.” He contrasted that 
statement by saying, “People who only work hard have limited 
leverage. If you’re working hard physically and not getting ahead 
financially, then you are probably someone else’s leverage.” He also 
said, “If you have money sitting in the bank in your savings account 
or retirement account, then your money is someone else’s leverage.”
Leverage Is Everywhere
As a young boy, my rich dad drew the following pictures to 
illustrate the principle of leverage.
Chapter Four48
Person Without Leverage
Person Using Leverage
Retire Young Retire Rich49
Rich dad said, “Leverage is everywhere. Humans have gained more 
of an advantage over animals simply because humans naturally seek 
more and more leverage.” In the beginning, animals could run faster 
than humans, but today humans can travel faster and further than 
animals because they created tools of leverage, such as bicycles, cars, 
trucks, trains, and planes. In the beginning, birds could fly and humans 
could not. Today, humans fly higher, further, and faster than any bird.
Leverage Is Power
Animals tend to use only their God-given leverage and are generally 
not capable of gaining any more leverage. That is why animals eventually 
lost their natural advantages over humans and humans took over 
the planet. The same thing happens when some humans use more 
leverage than other humans. My rich dad said, “People with leverage 
have dominance over people with less leverage.” In other words, just 
as humans gained advantages over animals by creating leveraged tools, 
similarly, humans who use these tools of leverage have more power over 
humans that do not. Saying it more simply, “Leverage is power.”
Explaining how humans gained more and more leverage, rich dad 
said, “A bird utilizes its God-given wings as its unique leverage. Humans 
observed birds in flight and then used their minds to discover how 
humans could also fly. A person who can fly from America to Europe 
has greater leverage over a human who only has a rowboat to get across 
the Atlantic.” He also said, “Poor people use fewer leveraged tools than 
rich people. If you want to be rich and keep up with the rich, you need 
to understand the power of leverage.”
The good news is that more and more leveraged tools are being 
created today, such as computers, the Internet, and whatever else is 
created in the future. The humans who can adapt to use these tools of 
leverage are the humans who are getting ahead. The people who are 
not learning to use more and more tools of leverage are falling behind 
financially or working harder and harder just to keep up. If you are 
getting up and going to work only to earn money, rather than working 
to gain some leveraged advantage in life, chances are that you are falling 
Chapter Four50
behind today. Never in the history of the world have so many tools of 
leverage been invented in such a short period of time. The people who 
use these tools get ahead. The people who do not use these tools fall 
behind just as the animals did.
 
God-Given Leverage
While studying the history of international commerce in New York,  
I learned that 5,000 years ago, humans began utilizing sails and the 
power of the winds to propel their ships across vast expanses of water.  
In this case, the wind and the sails of the ship were the leverage, allowing 
humans to travel further and carry greater payloads, with less effort. The 
people who employed the power of large ships with large sails became far 
richer than people who did not. It dawned on me that the people who 
become rich are the people who create tools to use the God-given leverage 
in front of them. Today, we can move more cargo and more wealth with 
just the click of a mouse than any ship of the sea could ever move.
People without Leverage Work for Those with Leverage
Throughout history, the people who have fallen behind are the 
people who fail to utilize the new tools of leverage created during their 
lifetimes. And the people who fail to use these leveraged tools are the 
people who work for the people who do, and they physically work 
harder than the people who use the tools of leverage. My rich dad often 
said, “The people without leverage work for those who have leverage.”
Obsolete Leverage
Because of the technology that came from human minds, we have 
different choices in leveraged transportation than our ancestors. Today, 
instead of just walking, we have the choice of riding a bicycle, driving 
a car, or flying a plane. Or we might choose to use the television, 
telephone, or email to span the distances.
Just as we have more choices when it comes to types of transportation 
and communication leverage, we have more choices when it comes to the 
types of financial leverage we can use. The people who utilize the more 
Retire Young Retire Rich51
leveraged financial tools get ahead financially. People who use obsolete, 
out-of-date, or inadequate tools of financial leverage put their financial 
security and their financial future at risk. Today millions of people are 
utilizing the financial tool known as the mutual fund to prepare for their 
retirement. While mutual funds are by no means obsolete, they are not the 
leveraged financial tools of choice of the more educated investor. And that 
is what this book is about. If people want to retire young and retire rich, 
they may need to replace their mutual funds with faster, safer, and more 
information-rich tools of financial leverage.
Why People Do Not Use the T ools of Financial Leverage
It is ironic that the poor and the middle class think of the financial 
tools of leverage as too risky. Because they think that financial leverage is 
too risky, most people do not utilize the faster tools of financial leverage. 
Rather than utilize the financial leverage the rich use, the poor and middle 
class tend to use physical leverage to try and get ahead. Physical leverage 
is also known as hard work . The rich get richer primarily because they use 
the financial tools of leverage and the poor and middle class do not.
Debt Can Be a Winner’s Leverage or a Loser’s Leverage
I talked earlier about using debt to acquire income-producing real 
estate. In that example, debt was my leverage. I can acquire much larger 
investments and get ahead faster than someone who simply works 
hard and tries to invest with their savings, otherwise known as equity. 
A person who knows how to use debt to acquire assets has superior 
financial leverage over someone who does not understand how to 
harness the power of debt. My rich dad said, “The rich use debt to win 
financially. The poor and middle class use debt to lose financially.” But 
in order to use debt as a tool of leverage, a person needs to have more 
financial education. The following chapters of this book will explain how 
you can gain this financial education.
My poor dad often said, “Neither a borrower nor a lender be.” He 
also said, “Pay off your bills as soon as possible. Pay off your mortgage 
as soon as possible. Being in debt is risky.” Those ideas and beliefs are 
Chapter Four52
some of the reasons why my poor dad worked very hard all his life and 
never got ahead financially. My rich dad worked less than my poor 
dad, and yet he made more and more money the older he got. My rich 
dad’s life was different because he knew how to harness the power of 
financial leverage. My poor dad didn’t because he thought it was risky.
It is ironic that the poor and middle class think using debt for 
buying assets is risky, yet they eagerly go out and use debt to buy 
liabilities. One reason the middle class and poor fall behind in life 
is because they use the financial power of bad debt. The rich use the 
financial power of good debt to propel them ahead. The person who 
works hard, saves money, and stays out of debt falls financially behind 
someone who has been trained to use debt as financial leverage. The 
average person thinks of debt as bad or they use debt badly. That is 
why most are trying to get out of debt and save money in order to 
retire. To them, staying out of debt and saving money is a smart and 
safe way of living life. Given the average person’s financial education 
(or lack of it), it probably is a smarter choice for them.
Other Forms of Leverage
There are other forms of leverage besides debt that Kim and I  
used to retire early. In order to build a business with eleven offices,  
we had to use OPT (Other People’s Time) to build another type of 
asset, an asset known as a business. In this example, the leverage was 
the employment of people in order to create an asset faster and make 
the asset bigger and more valuable.
The reason most people do not get richer faster is simply because it 
is their money (their savings held in a bank) and their time and labor 
(a safe secure job) that the rich are using as leverage to acquire and 
create the assets that make them rich. I could not have acquired so 
many assets in such a short period of time if I had not used those two 
different forms of financial leverage, which are OPM (Other People’s 
Money) and OPT (Other People’s Time).
Retire Young Retire Rich53
The good news is that there are many forms of leverage, other 
than OPM and OPT, that you can use to acquire or create assets for 
yourself. Just as humans harnessed the wind to power the sails of their 
ships 5,000 years ago, you can find many different forms of leverage 
to help you. There are infinite forms of leverage once you understand 
the principles of leverage and begin to look for it. As my rich dad said 
to me years ago, “Humans have always sought new and higher forms 
of leverage.” Consider the person who takes time to make a fishnet. 
A person with a net has far more leverage than the people who try 
to catch fish with their bare hands. Of course, that is only true if the 
person with the net knows how to use the net. A farmer with 1,000 
acres of land to plant has more leverage than a farmer who has just 
100 acres. Again, a lot still depends on the farmer’s abilities to manage 
a larger farm. A computer is a tremendous tool of leverage, but then 
again, it depends on what the computer is used for.
The following are a few examples of other forms of leverage. Your 
health, your time, your education, and your relationships can all assist 
you or hinder you in your goal to retire young and retire rich.
Health  
Obviously, health is a very important form of leverage. All too 
often, people do not appreciate the value of their health until they 
begin to lose it. What benefit will early retirement serve you if you 
are too ill to enjoy it?
Time  
Time is also an important leverage. Once people begin to fall 
behind financially, it is often difficult to find the time to get ahead 
in life. If a person is playing financial catch-up, it is difficult to 
be prepared to take advantage of opportunities that pop up in 
front of them. I often hear people say, “He got lucky because he 
was in the right place at the right time.” I think a more accurate 
statement is, “He got lucky because he was educated, experienced, 
ready, and prepared to take advantage of the opportunity when the 
opportunity presented itself.” 
Chapter Four54
 The extra time I enjoy from early retirement has helped me 
increase my wealth even more. I now have the time to look for  
and recognize opportunities.
 Education  
Education is an important form of leverage. The difference in 
earnings between someone who drops out of high school and a 
person who graduates from college can be measured in the millions 
of dollars, when measured over a lifetime. Yet a person who 
graduates from college with only a little financial education will 
often fall far behind a person who is financially educated, with or 
without a college education. 
 I have met so many college graduates who leave school deeply in 
debt from school loans. But worse than the school loans, many of 
these graduates are anxious to get a job so they can become deeper 
in consumer debt. That is the price of having a good education with 
no basic financial education. A high-paying job without financial 
education often means the person gets deeper in debt faster than 
someone with a low-paying job. That is not too intelligent.
 Not only will financial education help you retire young, it will help 
you keep your wealth for generations.
 Relationships  
Leverage can be found in your relationships, business and personal.          
The following are examples of the leverage found in relationships:
• I have seen many people suffer because they work for a 
business that is run by incompetent owners or management. 
I have also seen people do very well financially because they 
associate with financially knowledgeable people.
• A labor union, such as the teachers union or pilots union, is 
a form of relationship leverage. A professional organization 
such as the American Medical Association can be a form of 
relationship leverage. Unions and professional associations are 
Retire Young Retire Rich55
people with professional leverage that often bind together to 
protect themselves from people with strong financial leverage.
• Many people do well financially because they have excellent 
financial advisors. There are also many people who suffer 
financially because they have incompetent financial advisors. 
As my rich dad said, “The reason so many financial advisors are 
called brokers is because they are often broker than you. So be 
careful from whom you take advice.” Rich dad also said, “The 
most expensive advice is often free advice. It is the advice about 
money, investments, and business that you get from your poor 
friends and relatives.”
• Most of us have heard about power marriages. A power marriage 
is the marriage of two strong people who come together to 
become even more powerful. We have also seen married 
couples suffer financially because their marriage is not a loving, 
harmonious, and prosperous one. I would not be rich today 
without my wife, Kim, as a best friend and business partner.
• Speaking of marriage, I once heard a speaker say, “It is almost 
impossible to become rich if your spouse does not want to 
become rich too.” I do not know if that is 100 percent true, 
but I am sure there is some truth to it.
So the people around you can be a great source of leverage, positive 
and negative. You may want to ask yourself how many people 
around you are holding you back financially and how many are 
pushing you ahead financially. When it comes to money, your 
relationships can be important sources of leverage. Rich dad used to 
say, “Being rich is not so much what you know, but who you know.”
T ools  
A plumber finds leverage in using the right tools. A doctor uses 
medical tools in order to do his or her work. A car is a form of leverage 
for many of us. A computer now allows us to do business with the 
world through the Web, so it is a very important tool of leverage.
Chapter Four56
 Spare Time
 Leverage can be found in your spare time. I know many people 
who spend their time watching TV or shopping. Many of the 
people I have met or read about became rich in their spare 
time, rather than at their job. Hewlett-Packard and Ford Motor 
Company were started in garages, and Dell Computer was started 
in a dormitory room. A friend of mine was a lawyer on weekdays 
and a real estate investor on the weekends. Today he donates his 
legal services for free to charitable organizations and plays with his 
kids or plays golf full-time. He just turned thirty-nine.
Find the Leverage That Works Best for You
So I want to emphasize that there are many forms of leverage that 
you can use today to acquire and create assets to allow you to get ahead 
faster financially. You do not have to use OPM and OPT to get rich 
if you do not want to use those forms of leverage. Yet, if you want to 
retire young and retire rich, you need to find the leverage that works 
best for you.
Repeating once again, because it summarizes the theme of this 
book, rich dad said: “People who only work hard have limited leverage. 
If you’re working hard physically and not getting ahead financially, 
then you’re probably someone else’s leverage.” He also said, “If you 
have money sitting in the bank in your savings account or retirement 
account, then others are using your money as their leverage.”
The Importance of the Word “And”
One definition of leverage is the ability to do more with less.  
Rich dad added to that definition by saying, “Leverage is the ability 
to do more and more with less and less.” This idea of more and more 
with less and less is very important at this point. Rich dad said, “The 
difference between the rich, the poor, and the middle class is found 
in between the word more and the next word more. And the word in 
between these words is the word and.”
Retire Young Retire Rich57
Rich dad explained further by saying, “The rich keep adding more 
and more leverage, which is why they get richer and richer. The poor 
and middle class stop adding more leverage. The point at which you 
stop adding more leverage defines your financial station in life.” In 
other words, a person becomes poor when they stop increasing their 
leverage. The same is true for the middle class. The truly rich never 
stop increasing their leverage.
An example of this idea is my poor dad saying, “Get a good 
education so you can get a good job.” For many people in the middle 
class, their academic and professional education is where their 
education stopped. The rich do not stop there. They add more leverage 
by adding financial education to their list of more and more leverage.
The poor are different from the middle class because they generally 
have less education in their list of educational leverage. The poor often 
do not have even a basic education or they fail to add professional 
education to their list as the middle class does. The poor reach a 
certain level of education and the middle class add a little more 
education, but not enough education to make them rich.
There are three different kinds of education. They are:
•  Academic education
•  Professional education
•  Financial education
My poor dad stopped at professional education and was not 
interested in his financial education. That determined his financial 
station in life. My rich dad never stopped his financial education and 
that determined his financial station in life—rich. The poor are often 
poor because they often lack the basics of all three types of education.
The people falling behind today include those who have gained 
some form of leverage, but are failing to gain more leverage. Just 
because you graduated from college ten years ago does not mean you 
can stop working to gain more and more leverage. As rich dad used to 
say, “A college degree does not entitle you to stop learning or to stop 
increasing your leverage.” He went on to say, “Neither does a million 
Chapter Four58
dollars in the bank entitle you to stop learning. In fact, if you stop 
learning, your money will soon go to someone who has continued to 
keep learning. Your money will go to the person who realizes that true 
leverage is the ability to constantly do more and more with less and less.”
The Future of Leverage
Today we have high school kids who sell their businesses for 
millions of dollars and retire without ever having a job simply because 
they used a different form of leverage than their parents use. At the 
same time, we have baby boomers needing to go back to school in 
order to keep their jobs. The difference is found in the word leverage 
and the word and. Today your competition does not need to live in 
your city or even in your country. The people who will win financially 
are those willing to do more and more with less and less, not those 
who want to be paid more and more for doing less and less.
In the coming chapters, some of the dollar amounts 
I will talk about may not sound real to you. After all, it is 
often difficult to think about earning a million dollars a year 
without working when, at present, you may be working 
very hard just to make $50,000 a year. I emphasize the 
idea of more and more leverage because, regardless of what 
you earn today, a million dollars a year without working is 
entirely possible, if you are willing to keep thinking about 
doing more and more with less and less. If you are not 
willing to think in those terms, then going from $50,000 to 
$1 million a year may be difficult.
The irony is, the people who are unwilling to think in 
terms of doing more and more with less and less are the 
people who often wind up working more and more for less 
and less. The good news is that, as long as you are willing to 
think in terms of doing more and more with less and less, 
the more and more you will earn with less and less work. All 
you have to do is keep this idea in your head and it will be 
easier for you to retire young and retire rich.
Retire Young Retire Rich59
A suggestion: Get a clean sheet of paper and begin to write your 
answers to this question. The question is:
How can I do what I do for more people  
with less work and for a better price?
If you cannot think of anything, keep thinking. This is a very 
important question. This question, if answered and acted upon, makes 
people millionaires, even billionaires. That is why rich dad called it 
“the million-dollar question.”
In the next chapter, I will be going into the power of your mind 
as a tool of leverage. Being able to answer questions such as this one is 
vital to being able to retire young and retire rich.

Chapter Five
THE LEVERAGE OF 
YOUR MIND61
Why Some People Can and Some People Can’t
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote of a lesson with rich dad 
that is worth repeating.
The lesson begins with rich dad, his son, and me walking along a 
piece of beautiful beachfront property. Rich dad stopped, pointed, and 
said, “I just bought this piece of land.”
I was surprised that he could afford to buy such an expensive 
piece of property. Although I was relatively young, I did know that 
oceanfront property in Hawaii was expensive. Since my rich dad was 
not yet rich, I wondered how he could afford such an investment.  
Rich dad was about to share with me a very big secret on how he could 
afford investments he could not afford. It was one of the secrets that 
made him rich.
A Different Reality
Simply said, my rich dad could afford an expensive piece of land, 
even though he did not have much money at the time, because he 
made “affording it” a part of his reality. My poor dad, although he 
earned more money at that time, would have said, “I can’t afford it,” 
because the idea of buying such an expensive piece of real estate was 
outside his reality.
Chapter Five62
A Most Important Lesson
Over the years, rich dad taught me many important lessons that 
radically affected the direction and outcome of my life. This lesson on 
the power of a person’s reality is one of the most important. For those 
of you who read Rich Dad Poor Dad , you may recall that he forbade 
his son and me from saying the words, “I can’t afford it.” Rich dad 
understood the power of a person’s reality. His lesson behind his  
lesson was:
What you think is real is your reality.
Being a religious man, rich dad often quoted the passage from the 
Gospel of John in the New Testament: “and the word became flesh.” 
He would put that passage into more everyday terms so we as young 
boys could understand it. He constantly said to Mike and me, “What 
‘and the word became flesh’ means is that whatever you think and 
say is real becomes your reality.” When he came across that beautiful 
piece of oceanfront property, he refused to say, “I can’t afford it,” even 
though he did not have the money at that time. Instead he spent 
months coming up with a plan on how he could afford it. He worked 
hard at taking what was outside his reality and making it a part of 
his reality. It was not money that made my rich dad richer. It was his 
ability to expand his reality that ultimately made him richer and richer.
Is Investing Risky?
People often say, “Investing is risky.” To them, that idea is real, 
and because they think it is real, it becomes their reality, even though 
investing does not have to be risky. While there is always risk, just as 
there is risk in crossing a street or riding a bicycle, the acts themselves 
do not have to be risky. So many people think investing is risky 
because they think their ideas are real. 
A noted investment advisor from a famous bank and I were being 
interviewed on a radio program. The noted advisor was brought in to 
challenge the ideas I wrote about in Rich Dad Poor Dad . He started out 
by saying, “Robert Kiyosaki states that people should start their own 
businesses if they want to be rich. What Mr. Kiyosaki fails to realize is 
Retire Young Retire Rich63
that most people cannot start their own businesses. Starting a business is 
far too risky. Statistics show that nine out of ten businesses fail in their 
first five years. That is why Mr. Kiyosaki’s ideas are risky. Ask him what 
he has to say about those facts.”
The radio commentator, happy to have some controversy on his 
show, asked me in a gleeful tone, “Well, what do you have to say about 
those facts, Mr. Kiyosaki?”
Having heard this many times before, I was ready to take on the 
verbal challenge calmly. Pausing a moment, I cleared my throat and 
said, “I have seen and heard those same statistics quoted before, and 
from my experience, I would say those statistics are accurate. I have 
seen many businesses fail before their fifth anniversary.”
“So how can you recommend people start their own businesses?” 
asked the noted advisor with a hint of anger in his voice.
“First of all,” I replied, “I do not recommend people start their 
own businesses. I state that everyone should mind their own business. 
When I say ‘mind their own business,’ I mean they should mind their 
investment portfolio. That does not necessarily mean start their own 
business, although a well-run business is often the asset that makes the 
rich very rich.”
“So what about the risk?” asked the noted financial advisor.  
“What do you think about the nine out of ten businesses that fail?”
“Yes. What about that?” asked the commentator, a little less 
gleefully after realizing the discussion was not escalating into an  
on-air argument.
“First of all, while nine out of ten do not make it, notice that one 
out of the ten does make it. Once I realized that nine out of ten do  
not make it, I knew that I needed to be prepared to lose at least  
nine times.”
“You were prepared to lose nine out of ten times?” asked the 
financial advisor with a sarcastic tone.
“Yes,” I replied. “I have been part of the nine that did not survive. 
In fact, I have been that nine out of ten that did not survive twice, but 
then I made it on my third try.”
Chapter Five64
“So how did you feel when you failed?” asked the investment 
advisor, who was an employee of the bank and not an owner of a 
business. “Was it worth it?”
“I felt terrible the first time I failed. It felt even worse the second 
time. But yes, to me, it was worth it. If I had not failed twice, I would 
not have retired 18 years early nor would I be financially free today,”  
I replied. “It took me a while to recover each time. Yet even though I felt 
bad, I was mentally prepared to keep going 10 times, even 20 times if  
I had to. I did not want to fail that many times, but I was willing.”
“It sounds too risky for me, and it is too risky for most people,” 
said the advisor.
“I agree,” I replied. “It is especially risky if you are not willing to 
fail or fail only once before you quit. It’s even worse if you think that 
failing is bad. I was taught by my rich dad to understand that failing is 
part of winning. Even though I was successful in the past, I still realize 
that the odds remain the same. Every time I start a business, I continue 
to be aware that nine out of ten do fail.”
“Why do you say that?” asked the commentator.
“Because I always need to remain humble and respect the odds. I 
have seen too many people build a business, make a lot of money, get 
cocky, and start another business thinking the odds are now in their 
favor. While their odds may have improved a little because of their past 
experience and success, we all need to be humble enough to know that 
the odds remain nine out of ten for all start-up businesses.”
“That makes sense,” said the commentator. “So today when you 
start a new business, you still remain cautious. You still respect the 
one-out-of-ten possibility for success.”
“That is correct,” I replied. “I have had several friends get cocky 
and put all the money from their last business into a new business and 
then lose it all. If you want to be successful in life, you need to always 
be respectful of the odds, regardless of how successful you were in the 
past. Every professional blackjack player knows that just because they 
drew an ace and a king their last hand, it does not change the odds for 
their next hand.”
Retire Young Retire Rich65
“I’ll keep that in mind,” said the commentator.
“I still think it is too risky,” said the advisor. “You and your book 
are dangerous. Most people cannot do what you do. Most people are 
not prepared to run their own business.”
“Do you agree?” asked the commentator.
“There is some truth in that statement also,” I replied. “Our 
school system trains people to be employees rather than to be business 
owners, and that is why most are not prepared to run their own 
businesses. So I would agree with our noted advisor.”
Pausing, I let my comment of agreement settle in. I was doing 
my best to not get into an argument, even though I felt provoked by 
the investment advisor. Continuing on, I said, “Yet I will remind you 
that less than 100 years ago, most people were small independent 
businesspeople. Many of us had relatives who were farmers or owners 
of small businesses. They were all entrepreneurs. People 100 years 
ago were strong enough to run their own businesses in spite of the 
risks. It was only until people like Henry Ford began building mega-
businesses that more and more people became employees. Yet even 
with the advent of mega-businesses like Ford or General Electric, small 
independent businesses continue to thrive.
“In fact, small businesses are responsible for almost all of the job 
growth and are responsible for a large portion of all taxes collected. 
So in spite of the risks, more and more people continue to start 
their own businesses. Without them, there would be much higher 
unemployment. Without these individuals willing to take risks, we 
would be a financially backward nation. Free enterprise gives us all the 
opportunity to take risks and grow. If these individuals did not take 
risks, our nation would not be as prosperous as it is today. People who 
take risks increase prosperity.”
The interview went on for another ten minutes. There was no 
resolution and no agreement. It was obvious we came from different 
realities. As the conversation without agreement continued, I could 
hear rich dad saying, “Many arguments in real life are caused by 
differences in reality.”
Chapter Five66
The Risk-Reward Ratios Are in Your Favor
One of the things I wanted to say to the advisor was that the risk-
reward ratio was in my favor. But that would have certainly led to an 
argument, a test to see who was right and who was wrong. I did not 
make my point on the radio, but I want to explain my point to you—
the point that there is risk in what I do but it does not have to be risky.
Years ago, rich dad explained to his son and me the importance 
of knowing the risks, the rewards, and having a winning strategy that 
included losing. Rich dad was aware of the nine-out-of-ten failure 
rate of most start-up businesses. He was also aware that the reward 
for making it only one out of ten times far outweighed the risk of 
losing nine out of ten times. Rich dad further explained his position 
by saying, “Most people think only in the realm of what is smart and 
what is risky. Financially intelligent people think in terms of risk and 
reward. In other words, instead of immediately saying something is 
too risky, or right or wrong, good or bad, financially intelligent people 
weigh the risks and they weigh the rewards. If the rewards are great 
enough, they will come up with a strategy or a plan that will increase 
their chances of success, regardless of how many times they will lose 
before they will win.
A Winner’s Strategy
For example, I have a friend who uses his own simple risk-reward 
strategy for day-trading the stock market. He knows that chances 
are he will find a market move on one out of twenty trades. That is 
why he sets up what he calls a money-management strategy. If he has 
$20,000 to play the market with, which is one tenth of the $200,000 
in total cash he has, he will only risk $1,000 per trade. In other words, 
his strategy is to always have enough money to lose 19 out of 20 
times. I have seen him lose $14,000 on fourteen straight trades, and 
then suddenly make $50,000 on the next market move. His winning 
strategy takes in the probability of losing 19 out of 20 times, although 
he has never lost that many times in a row... yet. Each time he wins, he 
immediately goes back to the same odds, which are one out of twenty. 
Retire Young Retire Rich67
He knows the odds do not change, regardless of how much money he 
has. He still plans on losing 19 out of 20 times.
A Loser’s Strategy
The average person who avoids losing and expects to win 100 
percent of the time is the person who often has the loser’s strategy. 
Expecting to win 100 percent of the time and never failing is a loser’s 
reality. As rich dad said, “A winning strategy must include losing.” 
Most people today have a retirement plan that does not include the 
possibility of losing. Most people today simply expect the stock market 
to always go up, and that when they retire, their nest egg will last 
them as long as they live. That is a plan that has no room for losing, 
and that is why it is a loser’s plan. Winners know that losing should 
be a part of any plan. When I was in the Marine Corps, we always 
had contingency plans, which are plans for times when things do not 
go the way we expect them to go. Many people today do not have 
retirement contingency plans. Most people do not have retirement 
plans that include the possibility of a severe market crash after they 
retire, or outliving their retirement nest egg. In other words, when 
it comes to retirement planning, most people have a loser’s strategy 
because it is a strategy that does not allow any room for error.
Losing 98 Percent of the Time
In direct-response marketing, most marketers know that the 
chances are that 98 percent of the mailers they send out will not 
generate a sale. So professional marketers compute their marketing 
campaigns on a 2-percent return, some even lower. They know that the 
2-percent return must cover the cost of mailing to the 98 percent that 
do not reply. Once direct marketers find the mailing that can return 
2 percent or better, they simply increase the number of mailings, 
knowing that they will still lose 98 percent of the time. They know 
how to become very rich winning just 2 percent of the time and losing 
98 percent of the time.
Chapter Five68
Losers Think Losing Is Bad
Rich dad said, “Losers are people who think that losing is bad. 
Losers cannot afford to lose and often avoid losing at all costs. Many 
losers bet only on sure things such as job security, a steady paycheck, 
a guaranteed pension, and interest from a bank account. Losers keep 
losing and winners keep winning simply because winners know that 
losing is part of winning.”
As little boys, rich dad often asked us, “Are you willing to lose 99 
out of 100 times?”
The answer he was looking for from us was, “If the reward for 
winning outweighs the risks and costs of losing 99 times.” Asking us 
to explain further we would say, “If we knew we could win a million 
dollars, and the risk-reward ratio was 1:100 and the minimum bet  
was one dollar, we would get $100 in single bills and work our strategy 
to bet our one dollar 100 times. After we won once, we would go  
back to playing the same odds because the odds rarely change. We 
might increase our bets, but only if we could survive losing 99 out  
of 100 times.”
That was his simple way of training us to think in terms of risk and 
reward instead of right and wrong, risky or safe. Rich dad did not like 
gambling nor did he encourage us to gamble. He simply was training 
his son and me to think in terms of risk and rewards.
 
Why the Wright Brothers Were Right
Rich dad told his son and me about his trip to Kitty Hawk, North 
Carolina. He went there while on leave from the military in World 
War II. He said, “Boys, someday you need to go to Kitty Hawk and 
see just how smart Orville and Wilbur Wright were. The brothers 
knew there were risks in being the first to fly, but they were not risky.” 
Rich dad explained that the Wright brothers chose a large flat expanse 
of grassy sand to practice failing. He said, “Those young men knew 
they were going to fail so they found a very safe piece of ground to 
fail on. They did not jump off bridges or cliffs. They found a large flat 
Retire Young Retire Rich69
piece of ground with a good strong wind and practiced failing until 
the day they could fly.
“Because of their willingness to take risks wisely, those two young 
men changed the world forever. Someday, you two boys should go 
and see this piece of land where those two brave men chose to practice 
failing so one day we could fly. Most people will never fly financially 
simply because they choose to avoid failing.” In August of 2000,  
I stood on that same wide piece of grassy sand and saw what my  
rich dad had seen some 50 years earlier. I saw a piece of land that  
was the perfect place to fail before flying.
I was transported back to rich dad’s lesson about the Wright 
brothers. Rich dad would draw this diagram for his son and me:
“Humans can’t fly.”
REALITY“Humans can’t fly?”
POSSIBILITY“Humans 
 can fly.”“Humans 
 can fly.”
Chapter Five70
Explaining this diagram, rich dad said, “When a person says things 
such as:
• ‘I can’t afford it,’
• ‘You can’t do that,’
• ‘I can’t do that,’
• ‘That’s impossible,’
they are usually speaking from within their reality, making comments 
on ideas outside their reality.”
He would continue, “When the Wright brothers announced 
that they were going to be the first humans to fly, many people said, 
‘Humans can never fly.’ In fact, one of the people who said that was 
their own father, a respected man of the church.” 
The reason so many people said, “Humans will never fly,” was 
because that idea was outside the border of the known reality of most 
people at that time. But that idea was not outside the realm of possibility 
for the Wright brothers, and they spent years working on making the 
possibility a reality. 
When it came to money, that is the same thing rich dad did and my 
poor dad did not do. Today, the common phrase is, “Be willing to think 
outside the box.” Rich dad would say, “Everyone can think outside the 
box for a day. The question is, can you think outside the box for years? If 
you can, you will become richer and richer.” 
Retire Young Retire Rich71
When I later said to that financial advisor that I was willing to fail 
nine out of ten times in business just because the rewards far outweighed 
the risks, I doubt he heard me. He really did not hear me when I said, 
“I started the businesses knowing that I was probably going to fail. I did 
not think I would be successful, yet I knew I had to start failing.” That 
kind of thinking did not seem to be a part of his thinking. 
The point here is not who is right or who is wrong. The point to be 
made here is that our realities are different. And because our realities are 
different, we think differently and see the world differently.
The Leverage of Your Mind
I am not encouraging anyone to go out and randomly start losing 
or start playing blackjack in a casino. That would be almost as foolish 
as betting on the lottery to take care of your retirement. This lesson is 
about the difference in personal realities.
“Humans can’t fly.”
REALITY“Humans can’t fly?”
POSSIBILITY“Humans 
 can fly.”“Humans 
 can fly.”
Chapter Five72
The lesson is that our mind is our most powerful tool of leverage. 
Whatever we think is real becomes reality, in most cases. A person 
who thinks investing is risky will often find all the reality they want to 
substantiate that reality. This person will open the newspaper and read 
about all the people who have lost money investing. In other words, 
the mind has the power to see whatever it thinks is real and blind 
itself to any other reality. Just as people said to the Wright brothers, 
“Humans will never fly,” and to Christopher Columbus, “Can’t you see 
the world is flat?” people will always have their own realities.
In order to retire young and to retire rich, one of the most important 
things you can learn to do is to take control of your own reality. If you 
can learn to do that, making more and more money with less and less 
effort will become easier and easier. If you cannot control and change 
your reality, then getting richer and richer may take longer than you 
like. It was my rich dad’s ability to continually change his reality that 
ultimately made him rich. It was not the beachfront property that made 
him rich. It was his ability to change his reality. After he bought that 
piece of property, he was soon looking for even bigger pieces of property 
to test his reality on.
At the same time, it was my poor dad’s inability to change his reality 
that caused him to work harder and not get ahead financially. It was 
his constant saying, “I can’t afford it,” that shaped his reality. My poor 
dad was a very smart man. He could have afforded the same piece of 
land if he was willing to change his reality, but he did not know it was 
his reality that was in the way. He truly thought he could not afford a 
multimillion-dollar piece of real estate. His thoughts were his reality.
In the end, the primary difference between my rich dad and my 
poor dad was simply the difference in their realities. One chose to 
expand his reality by saying, “How can I afford that piece of beachfront 
property?” even though he could not afford it at the time. The other 
chose to say, “I can’t afford it.” It was not the beachfront property that 
made one rich and one poor. It was their choice of realities.
Retire Young Retire Rich73
The #1 Leverage
The number-one leverage is the leverage found in your mind 
because it is where your realities are formed. For Kim and me to retire 
young and retire rich required us to constantly control, change, and 
expand our realities. Today I tell people, “The first step in going from 
$50,000 a year and a lot of hard work to $1 million a year with very 
little work begins with a change of reality.” Reality change does not 
necessarily mean bigger or better. A change of reality may simply be 
a shift in point of view. For example, instead of saying something is 
“too risky,” as many unsophisticated investors say, ask instead, “What 
is the risk-reward ratio?” or “How many times will I lose before I win?” 
Instead of saying, “That piece of land is too expensive,” read a book 
about a person who could afford that piece of land, or ask someone 
who could afford that piece of land and find out how they could afford 
it. The important thing is not the land, but the change in your reality.
Why One Dad Got Richer and One Dad Got Poorer
Rich dad had the ability to continually change, control, and 
expand his reality. And because he could continually expand his reality, 
he became richer and richer while working less and less.  
My poor dad, on the other hand, chose to live within his reality. 
My poor dad lived in a world of what he thought was real and it was 
the only reality possible for him. That is why he worked harder and 
harder and retired poor. He had one fixed reality, and he did not know 
how to control, change, or expand it. Instead of changing his reality, 
he kept making statements such as, “I can’t afford it,” “I’ll never be 
rich,” “I’m not interested in money,” “When I retire, my income will 
go down.” His words became his life’s reality.
If you want to retire young and retire rich, you may need to 
change and expand your reality and make expanding and changing 
your reality a habit. As my rich dad constantly reminded his son and 
me, “Your thoughts and words do become flesh.”
Chapter Five74
Outside Our Reality for Years
Sitting on the cold Canadian mountain that New Year’s Eve, 
I realized I needed to be willing to think thoughts outside my 
reality, and continue to think those thoughts until those ideas 
from the realm of possibility  became my reality. Just as the 
Wright brothers spent years being willing to live outside the 
reality of most people, Kim, Larry, and I also had to live outside 
the reality of most people for years. In fact, we had to live 
outside our own reality for years. We often got into arguments 
with other people, and were occasionally criticized for being 
dreamers, foolish, reckless, or risky. Kim, Larry, and I had to 
live with the faith of our convictions for at least four years 
before we began to see any tangible results inside our reality. In 
other words, it took four to eight years to push our reality out 
to our goals that were found in the realm of possibility.
Today when people ask me what it takes to be rich, I say, “It 
takes the ability to expand your reality. If you are not willing to 
expand your reality, getting rich may take a very long time.”
A suggestion: One way rich dad had his son and me expand our 
realities was through reading biographies of people who lived the lives 
we wanted to live. For example, rich dad had us read the biographies 
of John D. Rockefeller and Henry Ford. More recently, I have read 
books by or about Bill Gates, Richard Branson, Steve Jobs, and others.
When I run into people who say, “I’m too old,” I ask them if  
they would be willing to read the story of Colonel Sanders, a man  
who did not start becoming rich until he was in his sixties. When  
I hear a woman say, “I can’t get ahead because it’s a man’s world,” I ask 
her if she has read the story of Anita Roddick, founder of the Body 
Shop. When people say they are too young, I ask them to read about 
Bill Gates, a person who became the richest man in the world in his 
early thirties. If those stories do not expand their realities, I doubt if 
anything will.
Retire Young Retire Rich75
Another great book is Body for Life  by Bill Phillips. A friend 
recommended I read it because he saw my waistline growing. Bill 
Phillips says many of the same things my rich dad taught me, but his 
subject is physical health, and rich dad’s subject was fiscal wealth.
Regardless of the subject, I found the process to be the same.  
For example, Bill Phillips writes about finding the reasons for losing 
weight before beginning to lose weight. Rich dad called it the why.  
Bill Phillips has an excellent section on dreams vs. goals and why both 
are important to the process. Yet the subjects in which I found the 
closest correlation between being healthy and being wealthy had to  
do with eating and going beyond your reality.
Bill Phillips encourages people to eat more, not less. He 
recommends eating six meals a day if you want to lose weight, gain 
strength, and get your health back. He says that many people who 
try to lose weight by starving themselves only starve for a short time. 
During that time, they lose muscle, not fat, and then they come 
roaring back on a binge, which makes them fatter. They get fatter since 
they now have more calories and less muscle to burn off the added 
calories. I know that pattern well.
Rich dad said the same thing about people who try to become rich 
by being cheap, being frugal, not spending money, living below their 
means, and scrimping. Most people do not become financially strong 
with that type of behavior. A person needs to spend more if they want 
to become rich, but they must know how to spend and what to spend 
on in order to become rich. As my rich dad said, “There are good 
expenses and bad expenses.” And most of us know that there is good 
food and bad food. Just as a person tries to lose weight by starving, 
a person who tries to get rich by being cheap only gets financially 
weaker, and then suddenly they too go on a binge. But it is not an 
eating binge. It is a spending binge. And just as a binge eater will load 
up on junk food, the binge spender loads up on cheap junk.
Bill Phillips also suggests that “maximum intensity occurs after you 
have perceived failure.” I believe what Bill Phillips is saying is that it is 
only after you cannot go any further, at the moment you fail, that you 
begin to heal and grow again. In other words, you become healthier 
only after you push yourself beyond your limits and fail physically.  
Chapter Five76
I say the same is true with becoming wealthier. I have noticed that 
most people are not successful because they avoid failure at all costs. 
Just as the investment advisor advised against starting a business 
because nine out of ten businesses fail, most people look upon failure 
as bad. Rich dad taught me that failure was essential to learning and 
success. I personally have learned more after I fail than before I fail. 
Although it sometimes hurts, the healing process after the failure is 
ultimately what gives me more emotional and financial strength.
I have met many people who are not successful simply because 
they have successfully failed to fail. They have failed to go beyond their 
own perceived reality on what they think is possible. When they fail 
to do that, they also fail to find out what is possible in their lives. As 
I said, I think it was my rich dad’s ability to continually change and 
expand his reality that ultimately made him wealthy. Bill Phillips is 
saying the same thing about becoming healthy. You do not become 
healthier by staying within your reality of how strong you are. If you 
want to become healthier and wealthier, you need to go beyond your 
reality. You need to live your life in the realm of new possibilities. 
The good news is that if you do consistently go beyond your limits, 
you gain the best leverage of all. You gain the leverage of becoming 
healthier, wealthier, staying younger longer, maybe even becoming 
better looking. To me, that is leverage worth living for.
If you are willing to expand your reality, you may want to begin  
by reading books or listening to recordings about people who have 
already achieved what you want to achieve. My poor dad encouraged 
me to read books on great leaders such as Presidents Lincoln and 
Kennedy, Gandhi, the Reverend Martin Luther King, and others.  
Even though both dads recommended reading to expand your reality, 
they just did not recommend the same realities because they came 
from different realities. I am glad I had exposure to both realities.
If you truly want to retire young and retire rich, the place to start 
is with your own realities.
Chapter Six
WHAT DO YOU THINK 
IS RISKY?77
Having two strong men as father figures gave me the opportunity 
to be aware of different realities. Although it was sometimes confusing 
or even contradictory, having to listen to two different realities was 
beneficial to me in the long term. I realized that both men thought they 
were right and occasionally thought the other was wrong.
My real dad was moving rapidly up the ladder in state government. 
He quickly rose from schoolteacher to the superintendent of education 
for the state of Hawaii. Noticing his rapid rise, people began to whisper 
that my dad would someday run for political office.
At the same time my dad was climbing the ladder of government, 
rich dad had been working hard lifting himself out of poverty on his 
way to becoming very wealthy. By the time his son and I were in high 
school, he was rich and getting richer. The plan he had been following 
for over 20 years was working. Suddenly people began to take notice of 
him and his activities. He was no longer this obscure figure that no one 
knew about. People now began to wonder who this person was who was 
suddenly buying trophy properties in Hawaii. Rich dad was a man who 
started with nothing, had a long-term plan, worked his plan, and was 
now coming on the radar screen of the rich and powerful of Hawaii.
In his forties, rich dad made his move from the small town where 
we lived and made a play for several large blocks of land on Waikiki 
Beach. The newspapers were filled with articles about this new player 
in the resort market. It was not long before he controlled a block of 
Chapter Six78
land on the beach at Waikiki as well as ot her beachfront properties on 
the outer islands. Rich dad was no longer a poor boy from a little town 
on a remote island. Rich dad had made his move into the heart of the 
action, and people noticed.
While my two dads were making their big career moves, I was in 
college at the military academy in New York. Mike, now the son of 
a rich man, lived in a penthouse apartment right on Waikiki Beach 
while he attended the University of Hawaii and was being groomed to 
run his father’s growing empire. It sounded impressive that he lived in 
a penthouse apartment, but in reality, Mike was running the hotel the 
penthouse was in while attending school.
While at home for Christmas break, Mike and I were in rich dad’s 
office discussing what we had learned at school and the new people we 
had met. Having met young men from all over the country, I made 
this comment to Mike and rich dad: “I have noticed how differently 
people think about money. I have met kids from very wealthy families 
and kids from very poor families. Even though most of the kids at 
school are academically bright, the poor and middle class do seem to 
think differently from the kids that come from rich families.”
Rich dad’s response to my last statement was swift. “They don’t 
think differently,” he said. “They think exactly the opposite.” Sitting 
at his desk, he grasped his yellow legal tablet and wrote down the 
following comparison:
                                Opposite Thinking
 Middle Class Rich
 Job security Building businesses
 A big house Apartment houses
 Saving money Investing money
 The rich are greedy. The rich are generous.
After he had finished writing, rich dad looked back up at me and 
said, “Your reality is defined by what you think is smart and what you 
think is risky.”
Retire Young Retire Rich79
Looking at his comparison, I asked, “You mean the middle class 
thinks job security is smart and building a business is risky?” I knew 
this reality well because it was the reality of my poor dad.
“That is correct,” said rich dad. “And what else about job security?”
I thought for a while and drew a blank. “I don’t know what you’re 
looking for,” I replied. “It is true that my dad and many people think 
that having a safe secure job is smart. What am I missing?”
“You’re missing my reality,” said rich dad. “I said to you that the 
middle class and poor don’t just think differently. I said they think 
exactly the opposite. So what is my opposite reality?”
Suddenly more of rich dad’s reality crept into my reality. “You 
mean to say that you think building a business is smart and job 
security is risky. Is that what you mean by opposite?” I asked.
Rich dad nodded his head.
“You mean you don’t think building a business is risky?” I asked.
Rich dad shook his head and said, “No. Learning to build a 
business is like learning anything else. I think clinging to job security 
all your life is a lot riskier than taking the risk to learn to build a 
business. One risk is short-term and one risk lasts a lifetime.”
This was the late 1960s. We did not yet know of the word downsizing . 
All most of us knew at that time was that you went to school, got a 
job, worked all your life, and when you retired, the company and the 
government took care of your retirement. All we were taught at home 
and in school was to “Get a good education so you can become a good 
employee.” It was implied, but not stated, that going to school to become 
more employable was the smart thing to do. Today most of us know that 
job security is a thing of the past, but back then, no one questioned the 
idea of seeking job security as being the smart thing to do.
I looked at rich dad’s comparison of “the rich are greedy” versus   
“the rich are generous” and I knew at that moment what my reality was. 
In my family, the rich were considered coldhearted, greedy people who 
were only interested in money and did not care about poor people.
Pointing at his list, rich dad said, “Do you understand the 
difference in thinking?”
Chapter Six80
“The thinking is opposite,” I said softly. “It is beyond just different. 
That is why it is often so hard for people to become rich. Becoming 
rich requires more than just thinking differently.”
Rich dad nodded and let that idea settle in. “If you want to 
become rich, you may need to learn to think exactly opposite of the 
way you think now.”
“Just the way you think?” I asked. “Doesn’t it require doing things 
differently also?”
“Not really,” said rich dad. “If you work for job security, you will 
work hard for most of your life. If you work to build a business, you 
may work harder at the start, but you will work less and less in the end 
and you’ll probably make 10 to 100 to 1,000 times more money. So 
which one is smarter?”
“And what about investing?” I asked. “My mom and dad have 
always said that investing is risky. They think that saving money is 
smart. Don’t you do things differently when you invest?”
Rich dad grinned and chuckled with that comment. “Saving 
money and investing money require exactly the same activities,” said 
rich dad. “You will do the same things, even though your thinking is 
exactly the opposite.”
“The same?” I asked. “But isn’t one riskier?”
“No,” said rich dad as he again chuckled. “Let me give you a very 
important lesson in life.” I was now older and he could add more 
detail to his earlier lessons. “But before I give you the lesson, may I ask 
you a question?”
“Sure, ask all you want.”
“What do your parents do to save money?” he asked.
“They try to do a lot of things,” I replied after thinking about his 
question for a while.
“Well, name one,” said rich dad. “Name one thing they do that 
they spend a lot of time doing.”
“Well, every Wednesday when the supermarkets advertise their 
weekly food specials, my mom and dad will go through the paper and 
Retire Young Retire Rich81
plan the weekly food budget. They look for sales and clip coupons on 
food items,” I said. “That is one activity they spend a lot of time on. In 
fact, our diet at home is based upon what is on sale at the supermarket.”
“Then what do they do?” asked rich dad.
“Then they drive around town to the different supermarkets and 
buy the items they found advertised on sale,” I replied. “They say they 
save a lot of money shopping for food on sale.”
“I don’t doubt they do,” said rich dad. “And do they shop for 
clothes on sale?”
I nodded. “Yes, and they do the same thing when they are in the 
market for a car, new or used. They spend a lot of time shopping to 
save money.”
“So they think that saving is smart?” asked rich dad.
“Definitely,” I replied. “In fact, when they find something on sale, 
they buy a lot of it and put it in their large freezer. Just the other day 
they found a sale on pork butt and so they bought enough pork butt 
to last six months. They were thrilled to find such a savings.”
Rich dad burst out laughing. “Pork butt?” he said, chuckling out 
loud. “How many pounds of pork butt did they buy?”
“I don’t know, but they bought a lot. Our freezer is full again. But 
it wasn’t just pork butt they bought. They also bought hamburger from 
another store that was on sale and put that in the freezer also.”
“You mean they have a freezer just for such extra-special sales?” 
asked rich dad, still chuckling.
“Yes,” I replied. “They work hard at saving every penny possible. 
They spend a lot of time clipping coupons and shopping at sales.  
Is something wrong with that?”
“No,” said rich dad. “There is nothing wrong with that. It’s just  
a different reality.”
“Don’t you do the same thing?” I asked.
Rich dad chuckled and said, “I’ve been waiting for you to ask. Now 
I can teach you one of the most important lessons you will ever learn.”
Chapter Six82
“The lesson that you don’t do the same things my parents do?”  
I asked again, waiting for an answer to my previous question.
“No,” said rich dad. “The lesson that I do exactly the same things 
your parents do. In fact, you have seen me do it.”
“What?” I said. “You shop sales to fill your freezer? I don’t believe 
I’ve ever seen you do that.”
“No, you haven’t,” said rich dad. “But you have seen me shop for 
investments that are on sale to fill my portfolio.”
With that statement, I sat quietly for a while. “You shop to fill 
your portfolio and my parents shop to fill their freezer? You mean to 
say that you do the same activities, but you shop for different things  
to fill different things?”
Rich dad nodded. He wanted his lesson to sink into my twenty-
year-old head.
“You do the same thing, but my parents get poorer and you get 
richer. Is that the lesson?” I asked.
Rich dad nodded his head and said, “It is part of the lesson.”
“What is the other part of the lesson?” I asked.
“Think,” said rich dad. “What have we been talking about?”
I thought for a moment, and finally the second half of the lesson 
came to me. “Oh,” I said. “You and my parents do the same things, 
but your realities are different.”
“You’re getting it,” said rich dad. “What about smart and risky?”
“Oh,” I said out loud. “They think that saving money is smart and 
that investing is risky.”
“A little more,” said rich dad.
“Because they think investing is risky, they work hard saving 
money, but in reality they are doing the same things you are. If they 
changed their reality on investing and did the same things with 
investments that they do trying to save money on pork butt, they 
would be getting richer and richer. You do the same things they do, 
but you shop for businesses, investment real estate, stocks, bonds, and 
other business opportunities. You shop for your portfolio, and they 
shop for their freezer.”
Retire Young Retire Rich83
“So they do the same things, but from a different reality,” said rich 
dad. “It is their reality that causes them to be poor or middle class, not 
their activities.”
“It’s their mental reality that makes them poor,” I said softly. “It is 
what we think is smart and what we think is risky that determine our 
socioeconomic standings in life.” I was using a new word I had learned 
from my college economics class.
Rich dad continued, saying, “We do the same things but we 
operate from a different mindset. I operate from a rich person’s 
mindset and your parents operate from a middle-class mindset.”
“That is why you have always said, ‘What you think is real is your 
reality,’” I added softly.
Rich dad nodded and continued, saying, “And because they think 
investing is risky, they find examples of people who have lost money 
or nearly lost their money. Their reality blinds them to other realities. 
They see what they think is real, even though it is not completely real.”
“So a person who thinks job security is smart will find examples of 
why job security is smart and find examples of why building a business 
is risky. A person will seek verification of the reality they want to 
believe in,” Mike added.
“That is correct,” said rich dad. “Is this making sense? Have you 
got the lesson?”
I nodded, yet I was still letting the lesson settle in. Pointing to 
the line on the yellow tablet that read, “a big house” and “apartment 
houses,” I said, “So my mom and dad are always shopping for a bigger 
dream house, and you are always shopping for bigger apartment 
houses. You are both doing the same thing, but you are getting richer 
while my mom and dad only get larger mortgage payments. That is 
another example of the power of mindset and reality, isn’t it?”
“It is,” said rich dad. “And why are your parents always shopping 
for a bigger house?”
“Because my dad’s pay keeps going up so his taxes keep going up. 
His accountant tells him to buy a bigger house because he gets a bigger 
tax write off for larger mortgage payments,” I replied.
Chapter Six84
“And he thinks that is smart, doesn’t he?” asked rich dad.  
“He thinks it’s smart because he believes his house is an asset and  
he gets a great tax break from the government.”
I nodded and added, “And they think that buying apartment 
houses is risky.”
“We both get the same tax breaks except that my tax breaks make 
me richer, and your mom and dad’s tax breaks make them struggle 
more and work harder. I have tax breaks for good debt, which is debt 
that makes me richer, and your mom and dad acquire tax breaks for 
bad debt. Now do you understand how smart  and risky determine a 
person’s reality?” asked rich dad.
Both Mike and I nodded. “I understand it better now,” said Mike.
“But what about the last line?” I asked, pointing to “The rich are 
greedy,” and “The rich are generous.”
“First of all, you do not have to be rich or poor to be greedy or 
generous. The world is filled with poor people who are greedy just as 
there are poor people who are generous, and vice versa,” said rich dad. 
“And as I have always said to you, there are many ways to become rich. 
You can increase your wealth by being cheap, but the problem is you 
are still cheap at the end of the day. You can become rich by marrying 
someone for money, which is a very popular sport, but we also know 
what that makes you. You can become rich by being a crook, but why 
risk going to jail when it is so much easier to get rich out of jail? And 
you can get rich by being lucky, but the problem is you have to count on 
luck rather than your intelligence when you want to become richer.”
I had heard this many times before. At this time, I really wanted 
further clarification on how to become rich by being generous so  
I pressed by asking, “So what about the differences between ‘the rich 
are greedy’ and ‘the rich are generous’?”
“Do you remember me telling you boys about doing more and 
more with less and less?” rich dad asked in response to my question.
We both nodded to his question.
“Well, doing more and more with less and less is one form of being 
generous. In fact, the easiest way to become rich is by being generous,” 
said rich dad.
Retire Young Retire Rich85
“You mean to become rich by serving more people,” said Mike.
“That is correct,” rich dad said. “Anytime I want to earn more 
money, all I have to do is ask myself how I can serve more people.”
Mike then turned to me and said, “My dad has never said this in 
front of you, but I think you are ready to hear his next lesson. We are 
old enough to understand a little better.”
“Understand what?” I asked.
“Should I tell him?” asked Mike.
“You’ve already started, so you may as well finish what you started.”
Mike turned to me and began to speak quietly. “Your dad has 
always told you that the rich are greedy. Isn’t that true?”
I nodded, saying, “In so many words.”
“The reason he says that is because he thinks the rich should 
pay people more and more the longer they work at a job. He calls it 
seniority or tenure. Is that correct?”
I nodded.
“But can you understand that, for the most part, the person is 
often only doing the same amount of work or doing the same job?” 
asked Mike softly.
“I understand that,” I replied. “But my dad does not see it that 
way. He truly believes in pay raises based on loyalty and longevity.”
“So your dad thinks the rich are greedy because they will not pay 
for loyalty and longevity. Isn’t that true?”
“He does,” 1 replied.
“Can you see how wanting more money for doing the same 
amount of work can be greedy?” asked Mike. “Or wanting to be paid 
overtime or wanting to be paid extra if the job the person does is 
outside the job description?”
“But that is how people in my dad’s world earn their money,”  
I said. “It is their reality.”
“That is the word,” said rich dad. “The word is reality . We come 
from different realities. In my world, to ask for more money to do the 
same job is greedy. In my world, if I want more money, I first need to 
Chapter Six86
do more and more for less and less money, for more and more people. 
Then I become rich.”
“That is why dad had us read the biography of Henry Ford,” 
said Mike. “Henry Ford became one of the richest men in the world 
because he provided automobiles for more and more people for less 
and less cost. From my dad’s point of view, Henry Ford was a very 
generous man. Yet many other people think he was greedy because, 
from their reality, he exploited the workers. The conflict comes because 
of a different reality.”
“I understand,” I said. “As I have grown up, I have noticed the 
differences between people who are willing to do more and more 
for less and less money and the people who want to do less and less 
for more and more money. In my dad’s world, it is the university 
professors who get paid the most and teach the least. They call it 
‘tenure’ and that is the model of reality my dad subscribes to.”
‘And they are entitled to think that is smart thinking,” said rich 
dad. “But that is not the way I think.”
“That is why your dad has a bigger house than my dad,” said Mike. 
“My dad has spent years buying and building apartment houses so 
he could serve more families with more and more affordable housing. 
The more apartments he builds, the more the price of rent goes down. 
If not for people like my dad, many lower income families would be 
paying more and more rent because there would be so few apartments 
available. More apartments means lower rents. It is the basic economic 
principle of supply and demand. Your dad worked hard to buy bigger 
and bigger houses for himself and his family. He provides houses for 
no one else, and yet he continues to think that the rich are greedy. It is 
your dad’s reality, but it is not my dad’s reality.”
I sat there silently grateful that Mike and his dad had been as 
gentle as possible with me on this subject. They were doing their best 
to point out to me the differences in the words greedy  and generous .  
At the age of 20, I was beginning to make a shift in my reality.  
I knew that I could choose the reality I wanted. And the reality I was  
choosing was the reality of my rich dad. And that reality was that 
Retire Young Retire Rich87
many of the rich were generous. I knew that from here on in, if  
I wanted to become richer, I first needed to find out how to be more 
generous. I knew that I could choose to try and become richer by 
asking for more money for doing less work, but I also knew that I could 
become richer by doing more for more people. I had that choice of 
reality. As rich dad said, “The thinking is not just different. It is totally 
opposite thinking.” At the age of 20, I was starting to think in an 
opposite direction from my own family’s thinking. In order for me to 
retire young and retire rich, all I needed to do was find out how to be 
more and more generous , not more and more greedy . I began to see that 
my own family’s way of thinking was the greedy way of thinking.
In book number two, Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant ,  
I wrote about the different people found in the different quadrants, 
illustrated below:
 
The different quadrants represent different realities. For a person to 
change quadrants or to be in two or more quadrants requires a change  
in reality. For example, the E quadrant, which stands for Employee, is the 
quadrant that sees the world from the job-security reality.
The S quadrant, which stands for Small business or the Self-employed, 
is the quadrant that sees the world from personal independence, the  
do-it-yourself or rugged-individual mentality. Even in this comparison, 
the comparison between the S quadrant and the B quadrant, the Business 
quadrant, you find the power of leverage coming into play. One of the 
main differences between a small businessperson and a big businessperson 
Chapter Six88
comes down to how many more people that business owner serves. A big 
business owner will do his or her best to build a system to serve as many 
people as possible. A small business owner often depends upon his or her 
personal touch to serve as many people as possible. The problem with the 
S quadrant is that the small business owner often runs out of time and is 
not able to serve as many people as the big business owner. So one of the 
differences between a small business owner and a big business owner is that 
an S business owner serves people personally and a B business owner uses a 
system to serve as many people as possible.
The I quadrant, which stands for Investor, is the playground of the 
rich. Investors make money with money. They do not have to work 
because their money is working for them.
A suggestion: You may want to take a quick quiz. The quiz goes 
like this:
In your family, what was their reality on the following subjects? 
   Smart  Risky
1. Job security  ———  ———
2. Building businesses ———  ———
3. A big house  ———  ———
4. Apartment houses ———  ———
5. Saving money  ———  ———
6. Investing money  ———  ———
7. The rich are greedy ——— generous  ———
Now you may want to take the same quiz based upon your reality. 
I ask that you take your family’s position first because that reality can 
be a very strong emotional reality. After comparing your reality with 
your family’s reality, you may understand some of the differences in 
reality between different members of the same family.
Retire Young Retire Rich89
In order to retire young and retire rich, I had to reject some of my 
own family’s reality before I could adopt and find my own realities. 
For Kim and me to retire young and retire rich, we had to find ways to 
serve more and more people, rather than be paid more and serve fewer.

Chapter Seven
HOW TO WORK LESS  
AND EARN MORE91
“If you want to get rich,” said rich dad, “don’t ask for a raise.  
Instead of asking for a raise, begin to ask how you can serve more 
people. In fact, if you are serious about becoming rich, you don’t  
really want a raise. If you get a raise, you are working for the wrong 
kind of money.”
In an earlier chapter, I shared how I retired early by increasing my 
debt rather than trying to get out of debt, which is what most people 
try to do. The logic behind that thinking is that there is good debt and 
bad debt, and most people are loaded down with bad debt. 
The same is true with income. Most people are not aware that 
there is good income and bad income, and most people do not become 
rich because they work hard for bad income. When you ask for a raise, 
you ask for an increase in bad income. If you want to retire young and 
retire rich, you need to work hard for the right kind of income.
In earlier books I discussed the three different types of income, 
which are: 
1. Ordinary income                                                            
Ordinary earned income is you working for money. This 
income comes in the form of a paycheck. When you ask for a 
raise, bonus, overtime, commissions, or tips, you’re asking for 
more of this type of income.
Chapter Seven92
2. Portfolio income  
Portfolio income is generally income from paper assets such 
as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. A vast majority of all 
retirement accounts are based on future portfolio income.
3. Passive income  
Passive income is generally income from real estate. It can  
also be royalty income from patents or for use of your 
intellectual property such as songs, books, or other objects  
of intellectual value. 
Why Rich Dad Did Not Like Ordinary Income
In rich dad’s mind, the worst kind of income to work hard for  
was ordinary income. To him, it was the worst income for four      
main reasons:
1. It is the highest taxed income and it is the income with the 
fewest controls over how much you pay in taxes and when  
you pay your taxes.
2. You personally have to work for it and it takes up your  
valuable time.
3. There is very little leverage in ordinary income.  
The primary way most people increase their earned income  
is by working harder.
4. There is often no residual value for your work. In other words, 
you work, get paid, and then have to work again to be paid 
again. To rich dad, there was very little leverage in working for 
ordinary income.
Growing up, I always found it interesting that rich dad did not 
like ordinary income. He often said, “The worst advice you can 
give your child is to go to school in order to get a high-paying job.” 
The reason he said that was not because he was against school. He 
was against teaching your children to spend their lives working for 
Retire Young Retire Rich93
ordinary income. Most people I knew dreamed of high-paying jobs 
with lots of ordinary income. As I said, the difference in realities was 
more than just different. It was exactly the opposite. Rich dad said, 
“Teaching people to spend their lives working for ordinary income is 
like teaching someone to be a highly paid slave for life.”
Why Rich Dad Liked Passive Income
Although he did receive all three types of income, if given the 
choice among the three, he would take passive income all the time. 
Why? Because it was the income he had to work the least for, it is 
often the least taxed, and it consistently earned him some of the 
highest returns over a long period of time. In other words, he worked 
hard for passive income because, in the long run, he worked less and 
less, served more and more people, and earned more and more the 
older he got.
In my quest to retire young and retire rich, I had to know which 
type of money to work hard for. Kim and I were able to retire early  
because our plan had us working hard for passive income and not for 
ordinary income, which is what most people do. Another difference is 
that we planned on retiring with more passive income and not portfolio 
income, which is what most people plan to retire on. While most people 
do retire on portfolio income, it is not always the best income because 
it is the second highest taxed of the three incomes, and taxes are your 
largest single lifetime expense. This chapter shall explain why.
My rich dad had all three types of income. The reason he had all 
three was because each type of income had different advantages and 
disadvantages. My poor dad worked hard for only one type of income. 
That difference between the two men made a big difference when 
measured over their working lifetimes.
Chapter Seven94
My Dads Worked Hard for Different Kinds of Money
My two dads did not work hard for the same kind of money. My 
poor dad said repeatedly, “Go to school so you can get a high-paying 
job.” My rich dad said, “It is not how much you make  that counts, but 
how much money you keep.” He went on to say, “Ordinary income is 
the income that you work the hardest for and you are allowed to keep 
the least of.”
50-Percent Money
Rich dad often called ordinary income, the income you receive from 
a paycheck, “50-percent money.” The reason he called it “50-percent 
money” was because, no matter how much money you earn, the 
government always takes at least 50 percent of it or more in one way or 
another. If you make $50,000 a year, then at least $25,000 may go to the 
government, most of it before you even get your hands on it (through 
withholding). Even after you receive that remaining $25,000, the taxing 
continues on. As most people know, you are taxed when you earn, spend, 
save, invest, and when you die. In fact your taxes at death can be very 
high if you are not properly prepared for the event. As rich dad often 
said, “If you do not have a plan for your money after you die, then the 
government does.”
From rich dad’s point of view, it was not very smart to work hard and 
have the government take at least 50 percent of what you work hard for. 
(A few years back, the tax rate was even higher than 50 percent. While 
the rate has come down over the last few years, many of the tax loopholes 
have been taken away in order to compensate for the lowering of tax 
rates. The fact is, when rich dad was in his prime earning years, he often 
called ordinary income “80-percent money” because that is how much the 
government took from highly paid people.)
My poor dad did not know that there was a difference in the different 
types of income. And since he did not know there was a difference, he 
worked very hard for “50-percent money” and then bought a bigger house 
for the tax breaks that he never really got. Rather than finding out more 
about the different types of income, my dad would go back to school so 
Retire Young Retire Rich95
he could receive a promotion and a pay raise. In other words, he worked 
hard, studied hard, earned more, and paid more and more in taxes 
because he worked for “50-percent money.”
Rich dad had a difficult time understanding people who spent their 
lives in search of a higher paying job or a pay raise. He often said, “When 
you get a raise, so does the government.” To him, spending your life 
working hard for “50-percent money” was not the financially intelligent 
thing to do.
20-Percent Money
Most people today are attempting to retire utilizing what my rich 
dad called “20-percent money,” which is money from capital gains 
or appreciation of stocks and sometimes real estate. When you hear 
politicians say, “My opponent is giving a tax break to the rich,” they 
are often referring to some sort of tax break on investment income.
Many people are financially smarter and not working so hard for 
ordinary income. Many people are asking for stock options that can 
be “20-percent money” if the company succeeds. (A certain portion is 
treated as ordinary income, but the increase in value afterward may be 
“20-percent money.”) A stock option can also be worth nothing if the 
business does not improve its perceived value to the market. The point 
is that people are catching on to the tax advantages and the different 
levels of leverage of the different types of income. The growing gap 
between the haves and have-nots is because most people are not aware 
that there are different types of income, and they work hard for the 
wrong kind of income.
 
0-Percent Money
One of the reasons Kim and I retired early was because we 
utilized tax-deferred money and many times what my rich dad called 
“0-percent money.” Tax-deferred money is money from capital gains 
that is not immediately taxed and is deferred for as long as we choose 
to defer paying those taxes.
Chapter Seven96
For example: We put down $5,000 and purchased a house for 
$50,000. T wo years later, we sold it for $100,000. We had a capital-
gains consequence of $50,000, but we chose not to pay the 20 percent 
in capital gains, which would have been approximately $10,000. 
Instead of paying the capital-gains tax, as you would if you had made 
the same amount from a stock or mutual fund, we deferred our gains 
and rolled $55,000, which was $50,000 in gains plus our original 
$5,000 down payment, into our next investment.
In other words, we had a 1,000 percent return in two years and 
paid no immediate taxes. We legally deferred our taxes and used 
what was technically the government’s money as a down payment 
on a larger apartment house for $330,000. We then used the bank’s 
money and some of the seller’s equity to help us finance the remaining 
$275,000 we did not have. Not only did we use OPM (Other People’s 
Money), we used government money to help us retire young and retire 
rich. Between 1988 and 1994, we utilized this investment and tax 
strategy many times.
In America, one of the advantages of investing in real estate over 
paper assets is this legal loophole in the tax code. The reason the 
government allows this loophole is because it wants investors to keep 
their money invested in real estate to provide a supply of housing for 
people who choose not to buy or cannot afford their own home. The 
tax break keeps investors such as Kim and me to provide an abundant 
supply of rental homes and thus keeps down the cost of housing. 
These tax incentives also keep the real estate industry vibrant and help 
the nation’s economy stay strong, since real estate makes up a large 
sector of the U.S. economy. If the real estate industry hurts, so does 
the country.
Tax-Free Money
There are many ways to earn tax-free money. One way is to invest 
in tax-free municipal bonds. An example would be a person who puts 
$1,000 in a tax-free bond at a 5-percent interest rate. That means that 
each year this person will receive $50 tax free.  
While it may not sound exciting, there are many times when such 
a return is desirable.
Retire Young Retire Rich97
Tax-Free Money from 0-Percent Money
Another way of deferring taxes is by taking the depreciation from 
the improvements on your property. For example, let’s say I buy a 
$100,000 rental property. The land is valued at $20,000 and the 
building is valued at $80,000. The government allows me to depreciate 
the building and not pay taxes on the amount of that depreciation. 
Let’s say the government allows me to take a twenty-year depreciation 
schedule on the $80,000 improvement. In many ways, that offsets 
$4,000 of extra income I do not have to pay taxes on in that year. 
While $4,000 may not seem like a lot of money, when your portfolio 
is in the millions of dollars, that amount in depreciation, when 
combined with other losses that are not really losses, can be significant.
One method the rich use to legally receive tax-free money is to 
simply keep deferring their real estate capital gains and then, at the 
end of their lives, roll that real estate into something like a charitable 
remainder trust. The moment they do that, they may never have to pay 
tax on all those capital gains or depreciation they deferred and used for 
much of their lives. It is due to these legal loopholes that so many rich 
people donate their mansions or other parts of their estate at the end 
of their lives. Their families have often become very wealthy through 
the deferral of the taxes on these assets they donate, and do not need 
the asset that made them rich anymore. They have made enough 
money to acquire other assets. Again, it does pay to be generous.
Competent Advice
The best advice is to seek competent advice. I am not a tax 
attorney, a tax accountant, or an estate attorney. These are highly 
specialized and complex areas of law that require the best advice you 
can find, especially if you are rich or plan on becoming rich. As rich 
dad often said, “The most expensive advice you can receive is free 
advice. It is advice from your friends and relatives who are not rich  
and have no plans on becoming rich.”
 
Chapter Seven98
Bad Advice
Not only can you receive bad advice from friends and family, you 
can also receive bad advice from so-called professional financial advisors.
Many people are advised that their home is their best tax 
deduction. In my opinion, that advice falls under the category of 
“bad advice.” In America, for every dollar you pay in interest, the 
government allows you approximately a 30-percent tax deduction. 
That means, if you give the government a dollar, it will allow you to 
save 30 cents. If that makes sense to you, send me a dollar and I will 
send you back 50 cents. Another minor point most advisors do not 
tell you is that after you exceed a higher level of ordinary income, you 
begin to lose that interest tax deduction on your house. That is another 
reason not to work hard for ordinary income and buy  
a big house for its tax advantages.
The Best Loophole of All
In the previous chapter, I wrote about the differences between 
what some people thought was smart and other people thought was 
risky. In my first example, I stated that my poor dad thought that job 
security was smart and that building a business was risky. My rich 
dad saw it exactly the opposite. Rich dad said, “If you work for job 
security, you will earn less and less the more you work. To me, that is 
too high a price to pay for a little bit of security.”
Today, as it was when I was a kid, the best way to earn more and 
work less is via owning your own business. It continues to be the best 
loophole in the world. One reason to start your own business is that 
you can spend first and then be taxed on the balance left over.
Employee   Business owner
Earns   Earns
Pays taxes   Spends
Spends what is left  Pays taxes on what is left
Retire Young Retire Rich99
An employee today pays for many of life’s finer things with after-
tax dollars. For example, most employees have to pay for their car  
with after-tax dollars. A business owner is allowed to pay for his or  
her car with before-tax dollars if it is used for business and meets 
certain requirements. When you are working for “50-percent money,” 
your car can be far more expensive than your boss’s car, even though 
your car costs less. Even such things as football tickets, trips, dinners, 
day care for your kids, and other benefits can often be purchased by 
a business owner with before-tax dollars. A business owner can pay 
for those things with before-tax dollars while an employee pays for 
them with after-tax dollars. (They must qualify as legitimate business 
expenses and may be subject to limitations.) 
So not only are most people working for “50-percent money” in 
America, most people are paying more for the good things of life with 
the money that has been reduced by about half. When I studied this 
difference with rich dad, I quickly realized that the price of job security 
was very expensive.
A Word of Warning
This book is not a legal textbook. This book is only written to 
make you aware of some of the differences in income. I caution 
you because it is legal to reduce taxes as long as you use these 
tax strategies in the pursuit of making more money. If you 
utilize these same strategies only to minimize taxes, then you 
are technically breaking the law. This is a very important point 
and is why I recommend you seek the best tax advice possible. I 
have met too many people who do things only for the purpose 
of saving on taxes, and they have been severely punished by the 
government. Again, the best professional assistance in this area 
of law is often priceless.
 
Chapter Seven100
Very Few Tax Breaks
When you study and understand the CASHFLOW Quadrant, you 
soon begin to realize that the tax laws are the worst for employees. In 
fact, it is the lower-paid employees who pay the highest percentage in 
taxes. So much for the government trying to protect the working class! 
Even the S quadrant has more loopholes than the E quadrant.
The best quadrant is the B quadrant simply because the B 
quadrant allows you to take advantage of the different tax laws in 
the different quadrants. For example, as a B-quadrant person, I can 
utilize the tax advantages of the E quadrant, the S quadrant, and the 
I quadrant. This is not necessarily the case for people in the E or S 
quadrant. In other words, if you are an employee or a self-employed 
professional such as a lawyer or doctor, you are not allowed to utilize 
the same loopholes the B-quadrant person enjoys. Yet the B quadrant 
person can utilize the laws of the E, S, and I quadrants when convenient. 
Again, competent financial and tax advice and planning are important if 
you want to use these laws to your advantage.
What Kind of Money Are You Working Hard For?
The question is: What kind of money are you working hard for? If 
you are working for “50-percent money,” you will have to work harder 
than the person working for less expensive money. The most expensive 
money is found in the E quadrant. If you ask any CPA, he or she will 
tell you that there is very little they can do for you in the E quadrant. 
The government has locked up most of the loopholes for this quadrant.
The Problem with a 401(k)
There are some major flaws in the 401(k) retirement program.  
One flaw is that, although you save your money in it and it hopefully 
grows free of the 20 -percent capital-gains tax when you withdraw it 
at retirement time, you are taxed at the 50-percent tax rate of ordinary 
income. Even though you believe you are investing in portfolio or 
20-percent money, when you cash it in, you are still taxed at the 
ordinary income rate of 50 percent.  
Retire Young Retire Rich101
In other words, even though you invest in tax-deferred 20-percent 
money, you are taxed at 50-percent tax rates when you need the money. 
That means you work all your life for 50-percent money, and when you 
retire, you are still taxed at the 50-percent rate.
The second problem with a 401(k) is that it only works for people 
who are planning on being poor. If your income remains high after 
you retire, you continue to pay higher taxes on your retirement money 
because your income went up, not down.
When I discuss the three different levels of financial plans, one to be 
safe and secure, one to be comfortable, and one to be rich, remember 
that there are different investment vehicles for each type of plan. 401(k) 
plans and savings are parts of a plan to be safe,  secure, and comfortable. 
They are not part of my plan to be rich.
The Problem with Social Security
The problem with Social Security is that it only works for people who 
want to be poor. If you find that Social Security is not enough for you 
to live on after you retire and you go to work for ordinary income, the 
government will begin reducing your Social Security payments. In other 
words, the only way to receive a full payment is to choose to be poor.
The Problem with Savings
For people who believe in keeping all of their money in the bank, 
thinking that saving is smart, their money is working for 50-percent 
money. I too have money in the bank, but I do not think that saving 
is as smart as many people do. I have money in savings as part of my 
financial plan to be safe and secure, not as part of my plan to be rich. 
This is true even though I do not think it is smart to have my money 
working for 50-percent money as well as losing ground to inflation.
 
The Worst Reality
In the following chapters, you will learn why the advice “Go to 
school, get a job, work hard, save money, and put money in your 
401(k)” could be the worst advice from a tax point of view. At each 
Chapter Seven102
step of the way, the advice recommends working hard for 50-percent 
money. My poor dad was poor because this was his advice to himself 
and to his kids. It was his only reality when it came to money.
How You Can Earn More Tax-Advantaged Income
If you want to retire young and retire rich you will need to follow 
my rich dad’s advice. And his advice began with the idea of minding 
your own business.
By simply starting a small home-based business, buying a 
franchise, or joining a network-marketing company, you are moving 
into more tax-advantaged income. If you can reduce the cost of 
some of your expenses, just by utilizing tax-advantaged dollars, you 
are getting ahead financially. But always remember that your intent 
must be to make more money and not just avoid paying taxes. One is 
looked upon as tax planning and the other as tax evasion.
Tax strategy is not a do-it-yourself activity for those people serious 
about becoming rich and staying rich. You will need to find competent 
advisors who will work with you to devise a strategic tax plan.
 
Working for Free
In Rich Dad Poor Dad , I told a story of my rich dad taking away 
my 10-cents-per-hour salary and asking me to work for free. Many 
people think it is an interesting story, but working for free is not a part 
of their reality. I would like to leave you with this thought: If you want 
to work for tax-deferred or tax-free money, it does mean working for 
free in most instances.
Money that comes from compensated labor is the highest taxed 
of all incomes. That is why I often cringe when I meet bright young 
people in school who are excited about soon getting a high-paying 
job. A young person with that mindset or that reality is a person who 
winds up working harder and harder for “50-percent money.” One 
day they wake up at age 40 with their high-paying job and begin to 
wonder why some of their friends have passed them by financially.  
The reason hardworking employees get passed by financially later in 
Retire Young Retire Rich103
life is because they worked hard for ordinary income. They worked 
hard for pay raises and bonuses.
Even though my poor dad started out earning more ordinary 
income than my rich dad, my rich dad eventually passed and surpassed 
my poor dad’s earning potential. My rich dad said, “You will invest 
time regardless if you work for ordinary, portfolio, or  passive income. 
The trouble with working for ordinary income is that you have to 
keep working hard for it. Eventually a person working for portfolio 
and passive income will pass the earning potential of ordinary income 
because you can work less, earn more, and pay less and less in taxes 
when you work for portfolio and passive income.” The reason for this 
is explained here:
Ordinary income  50-percent money
Portfolio income  20-percent money
Passive income  0-percent money
My poor dad was passed by my rich dad simply because ordinary 
income is often income from labor. The other two incomes are income 
from assets. As time went on, my rich dad slowly but surely kept 
increasing the number and size of the assets he had working for him. 
My poor dad only knew how to personally work harder and harder for 
more and more “50-percent money.”
People in the E quadrant have the least control over their taxes 
and pay the most in taxes, even after they retire. If your income 
today comes from the E quadrant, you may want to consider doing  
something to earn income from other quadrants. The S quadrant has 
a few more advantages over the E quadrant, the main one being the 
ability to deduct some expenses from your gross income prior to being 
taxed. The problem with both the E and the S quadrants is that the 
leverage factor of personal labor is minimal and the taxes are higher. 
The quadrants with the most control over taxes, the highest leverage 
potential for labor-free income, and the most legal tax advantages are 
the B and I quadrants.
Chapter Seven104
If you are serious about retiring young and retiring rich, you may 
want to consider working for free. The moment you ask yourself the 
question, “How can I become rich by working for free?” you begin to 
push your mind into another reality. If nothing comes to your mind 
on how you can get rich by working for free, keep pushing your reality 
or begin investing some time and education into studying the lives of 
people who became rich in the B and the I quadrants.
My rich dad said, “It is hard to become rich working for money. 
If you want to become really rich, learn how to build, buy, or create 
assets.” He also said, “Working hard for pay raises is very risky.” It is 
risky because people often get deeper into the Rat Race of life working 
for pay raises. Also, other people get ahead financially faster than you.
Many of the very rich became rich in their spare time. So, if you 
have a job because you have financial responsibilities, keep your job 
but make better use of your spare time. When your friends play golf 
or go fishing or watch sports on TV, you can be starting your part-
time business. Hewlett-Packard was started in a garage, as was Ford 
Motor Company. Keep in mind that today you can go from poor 
to rich faster than ever before. Michael Dell went from college kid 
to billionaire in three years. While his classmates were doing their 
homework or drinking beer at parties, he was building a billion-dollar 
business in his dormitory room. Most of his classmates, now in their 
thirties, are working hard for 50-percent money. Many are now going 
back to school in hopes of getting a promotion and a raise, and are still 
drinking beer and watching sports on TV. They may have a big house, 
an SUV, kids in private school, and are hoping their 401(k) will have 
enough money in it when they retire. Some are silently wondering 
how Michael Dell, a college dropout, got so lucky. His luck began with 
a difference in reality, a willingness to study, but not study for grades, 
and a willingness to work for free.
The reason Kim and I retired early was because we worked hard 
to build businesses and buy real estate. That plan allowed us to work 
less and less and earn more and more. We did not work for money. We 
worked hard to build, buy, or create assets, as my rich dad had advised. 
Retire Young Retire Rich105
We were not interested in high-paying jobs or pay raises. We were not 
interested in working at a job without much leverage and working for 
money that had its leverage reduced by 50 percent. To us that was not 
smart and, in the long run, it was much more risky. In later chapters,  
I will go into how you can work to acquire more assets with less risk 
and higher financial yields. Yet I warn you that you may need to study 
and work for free in order to learn how to acquire such assets. I warn 
you now because studying and working for free are things that very 
few people do. That is why there are so very few people who retire 
young and retire rich.
I am not against paying taxes. Tax is an expense of living in 
a civilized society. Without taxes, we would not have police, 
firemen, teachers, sanitation workers, courts, roads, traffic 
lights, and of course politicians. The point of this chapter is to 
learn the legal and intelligent control over how much you pay 
in taxes and when you pay them.
A suggestion: List how much you currently earn a month in the 
following types of income:
1. Ordinary income $  ____________
2. Passive income $  ____________ 
3. Portfolio income $  ____________ 
If you want to retire, you will need passive and portfolio income, 
in most cases. The sooner you learn to acquire passive and portfolio 
income, the sooner you are on your way to retiring young and retiring 
rich. Not only will you be able to retire earlier, but you may also  
feel more financially secure. You may also feel smarter, since you  
will be earning 20 percent or even tax-deferred income, rather than  
50-percent income, which is the type of income most people are 
working so hard for.
Chapter Seven106
The final sections of this book will go into ways to acquire more 
portfolio and passive income with greater safety and higher returns.  
But again, it may require more study and working for free before 
you receive those types of income. It often takes dedicated study and 
working for free to go into another reality. If you should decide to 
embark upon this journey to acquire the better-leveraged incomes, 
always remember the Wright brothers. They are prime examples of 
people who studied because they wanted to learn and not for grades. 
They worked hard for free without guarantees, took risks intelligently, 
and pushed themselves and the world into another reality.
Chapter Eight
THE FASTEST WAY
 TO GET RICH107
Soon after publishing Rich Kid Smart Kid , the fourth book in 
the Rich Dad series, a review of the book appeared in a prominent 
newspaper. Almost all of the media reporting on the Rich Dad series 
has been extremely favorable. They have been more than fair, as well 
as objective, in their reviews of my books. This particular newspaper 
article on Rich Kid Smart Kid did  not start out the same way. This 
journalist began the review with an attack on my inability to write. 
He more or less said that I needed to go back to school and take 
writing lessons. The irony is that I openly disclose in the book that 
I failed high school English twice because of my inability to write. 
Being labeled stupid and a failure at the age of 15 because I was a 
poor writer was a very painful event in my life.
Since then I never have claimed to be a writer. Writing could  
be my weakest skill and the reason I had such a tough time in school. 
The fourth book in the Rich Dad series is about how I overcame my 
inability to read and write and still graduate from college. Rich Kid 
Smart Kid  is about finding and developing your child’s unique genius, 
as well as the need to develop their financial survival skills. So the 
journalist’s critique was not on content, but on my writing skills, the 
same problem I had all through school.
The journalist ended the review by throwing out one comment 
he thought was favorable and would make the article balanced 
and objective. He wrote, “This book will help your child be more 
employable.” Now, I found the criticism of my writing skills justified. 
But to put in his article that my book’s only socially redeeming 
Chapter Eight108
factor was that it made your child more employable was so far off the 
mark that I became offended. I doubted if the reporter had even read 
the book. Rich Kid Smart Kid is not about making your child more 
employable. It is about making your child more unemployable. If you 
want to retire young and retire rich, you need to think about how to 
become  less employable, not  more employable. Again, the difference is 
found in mental realities.
How to Become Unemployable
In summarizing the importance of mental leverage, I restate that 
your reality is simply what you think is real. Or as commonly stated, 
your perception is your reality. When asked, “Is it hard to change one’s 
reality?” I reply with, “It depends.” For me, it was a personal struggle 
to shed my poor dad’s reality of what he thought was the smart thing 
to do and adopt my rich dad’s ideas on what he thought was smart. In 
many ways, changing one’s reality from a middle-class or poor reality 
to a rich reality may be like learning to eat with your left hand after 
you have spent years eating with your right. While it is not hard to do 
and anyone can do it if they persevere, it may not be the easiest thing 
to do either.
The fastest way to become rich is to change your realities faster. 
That may be easier said than done for most people, because I have 
observed that most would rather remain within the comfort of their 
realities, even if it is a reality of financial struggle and constriction. 
Rich dad said, “Most people would rather live within their means 
than expand their means.” He believed most people would rather be 
comfortable working hard all their lives than be uncomfortable for a 
few years, working hard at changing their realities, and taking the rest 
of their lives off. Using the metaphor of switching from right hand to 
left hand, most people would rather be poor eating with their right 
hand than become rich by learning to eat with their left hand. In many 
ways, that is what a change in mental reality requires.
Retire Young Retire Rich109
Content versus Context
In an article entitled “Learning 101” in Fast Company magazine, 
we read:
Learning is the single most important tool for people, teams, 
and companies that want to get fast and stay fast  
in the new economy… 
In the old economy, content  was king.  
In the new economy, context  is king.
In other words, learning to shift from right-hand to left-hand 
dominance is more important than what kind of fork is being used.
The current school system still struggles with giving kids better 
content rather than looking at how the Information Age has changed 
the context of the world we now live in. Just as the book reviewer 
described earlier felt the only socially redeemable point of my book 
was to make your child more employable, most schoolteachers are 
trying to create course content that will hopefully make your child 
more employable. That is why the school system continues to focus on 
content rather than context.
The context of the world has changed. When my mom and dad 
were growing up in the Great Depression, the context was that jobs 
were scarce and job security was king. That is why my mom and 
dad stressed the importance of good grades and a secure job. In my 
parents’ day, if you found a secure job with a good company, and you 
were loyal and hardworking, you were set for life. The company was 
responsible for your financial security after you retired. Today, most 
people realize that the context or the rules of employment have been 
changed forever.
Content, Context, and Capacity
Although my rich dad did not use the words content  and context  
very often, choosing instead to use the word reality , he did use the 
word capacity  regularly. He would say, “Not only does a poor person 
have a poor reality, having a poor reality means that person has very 
little capacity to allow money to stay with them.”
Chapter Eight110
He meant that when people say such things as, “I’ll never be rich,” 
“I can’t afford it,” or “Investing is risky,” it diminishes their capacity to 
be rich. He said, “When a person with a poor or middle-class reality 
suddenly comes into money, they often do not have the mental and 
emotional capacity to handle the sudden abundance of money, so the 
money overflows and runs away.” That’s why you so often hear people 
say, “Money just slips through my fingers.” Or “No matter how much 
I make, I’m short of money at the end of the month.” Or “I’ll invest 
when I have some extra money.”
Occasionally I will use the example rich dad used to drive his 
message on context home to his son and me. Rich dad would take an 
empty water glass and then pour water from a full and large pitcher 
into the water glass. It would not be long before the water would 
overflow the smaller water glass and would continue to overflow as 
long as he poured. Rich dad would say, “There is plenty of money in 
the world. If you want to be rich, you need to first expand your reality 
[context] in order to hold on to your share of that abundance.” 
I use this same graphic example to explain the relationship among 
content, context, and capacity. I first start pouring water in a one-
ounce jigger, then a small water glass, and then a larger water glass. It 
is a simple demonstration to illustrate the differences in capacity to 
hold on to money between the poor, middle class, and rich.
How to Expand Your Capacity
When asked, “How do I begin to expand my reality or context?” 
I reply with, “By watching your ideas.” I also remind people of one 
of rich dad’s favorite sayings, “Money is just an idea.” I answer by 
imparting the same advice my rich dad passed on to me. 
He pointed out statements such as:
• “I can’t afford it.”
• “I can’t do that.”
• “That’s wrong.”
• “I already know that.”
Retire Young Retire Rich111
• “I tried that once and it did not work.”
• “That’s impossible. It will never work.”
• “You can’t do that.”
• “That’s illegal.”
• “That’s too hard to do.”
• “I’m right and you’re wrong.”
Rich dad said, “Cynics and fools are twins on opposite sides of reality 
and possibility.” He went on to say, “Fools will believe any far-fetched 
scheme, and a cynic will criticize anything outside their reality.” He 
finished his explanation by saying, “A cynic’s reality does not let anything 
new in, and a fool’s reality does not have the ability to keep foolish ideas 
out. If you want to be abundant and rich, you need to have an open 
mind, a flexible reality, and the skills to turn new ideas into real and 
profitable ventures.”
Requoting the statement from Fast Company  magazine:
 In the old economy, content  was king.  
 In the new economy, context  is king.
My rich dad would have said it this way: “If you want a faster 
way to get rich, you need to have a mind open to new ideas and have 
the skills to take on possibilities greater than your current abilities. 
In order to do that, you must have a reality that can change, expand, 
and grow quickly. To try and get rich with a poor person’s reality or a 
reality that comes from lack and limitation is a mission impossible.”
Why Not Get Rich
Sitting on the mountain in British Columbia in 1985, Kim, 
my friend Larry, and I decided that we were willing to be very 
uncomfortable and push ourselves into new realities in order to retire 
young and retire rich. Believe me, at times it was very uncomfortable. 
When I am asked how we got rich and retired young, I simply say, 
“We kept changing our realities.” 
Chapter Eight112
When asked how to change one’s reality, I simply quote Robert 
Kennedy’s famous saying:
Some men see things as they are and say, “Why?”
I dream things that never were and say, “Why not?”
It is a matter of going beyond the comfort of your current   
realities and into the realm of new possibilities for your life. As   
Robert Kennedy said, “Why not?”
Having a mind that can expand its reality or context quickly is an 
important form of leverage. In fact, it may be your most important 
form of leverage, especially in this rapidly changing world. To rich 
dad, having a mind that could expand its reality quickly was very 
important. In fact, I believe it was his great personal skill and the 
reason for his ever-increasing financial success. Now that I am older 
and hopefully wiser, I more fully appreciate why rich dad forbade 
his son and me from saying “I can’t afford it.” In the coming years, 
your ability to change and expand your reality will be your single 
most important form of leverage. In the coming years, those who can 
change and expand their context will prosper and move ahead  
of those who cannot. As the Fast Company  magazine says, “In the  
new economy, context is king.”
If you want to keep up and retire young and retire rich, you will 
need to be able to continually change your context quickly, because 
context determines content. And context plus content equals capacity.
Retire Young Retire Rich113
This more or less completes the ideas on the importance 
of mental leverage. Although this is the end of the mental-
reality section, much of this book will refer back to this very 
important concept of the power of one’s reality.
The next section of the book is the importance of the leverage 
of your personal financial plan. The reason having a plan is so 
important is because most people have dreams, but they fail to 
have a plan. It is important to have a dream of retiring young 
and retiring rich, but in order for the dream to come true, a 
person needs to have a plan to bridge the dream into reality.
Your mental leverage will be tested in the next section because 
we go into dollar amounts that are beyond most people’s 
realities. If the dollar amounts are beyond your reality, or your 
context, then those dollar amounts will remain only dreams. 
As stated earlier, it is often difficult for a person who is earning 
less than $50,000 a year to imagine retiring in a few years with 
over a million dollars in income. While most people will dream 
of someday retiring with that much money, less than 1 percent 
of the U.S. population will. That reality will forever remain a 
dream for the other 99 percent.
The good news is that, if you understand the importance 
of having the right reality or context and understand the 
importance of having a plan, your chances of retiring young 
and retiring rich are greatly increased.
If you can change your reality and have a strong plan, you may find 
that making $1 million or more without working can be a lot easier 
than working all your life for $50,000. All it takes is a flexible reality or 
context and a plan that is followed. The next section is on creating your 
plan, a highly leveraged plan to retire young and retire rich.
 
115
The following are excerpts from an interview with Robert 
Reich, Secretary of Labor in the Clinton administration:
“The widening gap between the rich and the poor is setting us up 
for serious trouble.
“As Secretary of Labor, my goal was to try and get more jobs and 
better wages for Americans, and after working hard at that role 
for a number of years, you can’t help but feel jobs and wages are 
everything. But they’re not.
“It’s not simply a matter of having a job or even having decent  
pay anymore.
“In the new economy, with unpredictable earnings... two tracks 
are emerging, the fast track and the slow track and the absence of 
gradations between.”
The question is: Are you and your plan on the fast track 
or the slow track?Section Two  
THE LEVERAGE OF 
YOUR PLAN

Chapter Nine
HOW FAST IS YOUR PLAN?117
                          “I have the need for speed.”  
                    — Tom Cruise in the movie Top Gun
The idea of working all your life, saving, and putting money into a 
retirement account is a very slow plan. It is a good and sensible plan for 
90 percent of the people. But it is not a plan for someone who wants to 
retire young and retire rich. If you want to retire young and retire rich, 
you need to have a plan that is far faster than the plans of most people.
If you have a chance, see the movie Top Gun  and watch the speed at 
which those young pilots had to fly and make life-and-death decisions. 
The capacity to handle speed was important to those young pilots because 
their lives depended upon the speed at which they handled speed.
 The same is true in life and business today. The speed at which you 
can change and expand your context in order to adapt to the changes 
in the business world today is critical to every one of us who wants to 
succeed and do well financially. The gap is no longer between the haves 
and have-nots. Today the gap that is changing the most rapidly is the 
financial gap between the middle class and the rich. Saying it bluntly, 
if you have a slow Industrial-Age plan, or context, you are being left 
behind financially—not by your peers, but by younger people with 
faster minds and more accelerated ideas. This accelerating rate of change 
of contexts is why we have twenty-five-year-olds who are billionaires 
and we have fifty-year-olds still hoping to find a $50,000 a year job. The 
sad thing is that many of these same fifty-year-old peers of mine are still 
advising their kids to follow in their footsteps, riding the same slow train 
their parents rode on.
Chapter Nine118
In book number three, Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I began with 
the statement that investing is a plan . I also said that most people plan 
on being poor, which is why so many people say as my poor dad did, 
“When I retire, my income will go down.” In other words, they planned 
on working hard all their lives only to become poorer. Rich dad said, “If 
you want to be rich and retire young, you must have a very fast plan that 
makes you richer and richer with less and less work.”
How Do You Create a Fast Plan?
One of rich dad’s basic tenets on money is, “Money is an idea.” 
Adding onto this, rich dad also said, “There are fast ideas and slow ideas, 
just as there are fast trains and slow trains. When it comes to money, 
most people are on the slow train, looking out the window watching the 
fast train pass them by. If you want a faster way to become rich, your plan 
must include fast ideas.”
If we were to build a house, most people would first hire an architect, 
and the architect would work with you to create a set of plans. Yet when 
these same people begin to build their fortune or plan for the future, 
most people do not know where to begin, and they never design a 
financial plan for their lives. There are no blueprints to wealth. When it 
comes to money, most people follow their parents’ financial plan, and 
that plan is often to work hard and save money. Following that plan, 
millions of people then sit on the train to and from work and watch the 
limos, corporate jets, and luxury homes from the window of their train.
If you don’t plan on spending your life gazing out the window of 
your train, plane, or car, stuck in rush-hour traffic, you may want to 
begin creating a faster financial plan. The following are some ideas on 
how to begin to build and develop a faster plan.
1.  Choose your exit strategy first.
 I am often asked, “How do I begin investing?” or “What should 
I invest in?” My response to their question is another question, 
“What is your exit strategy?” And sometimes, my second question 
is, “How old do you want to be when you exit?”
Retire Young Retire Rich119
 My rich dad repeatedly said, “A professional investor always has 
an exit strategy before they invest.” Having an exit strategy is an 
investment fundamental. That is why rich dad also said, “Always 
start at the end before you begin.” In other words, before you get 
into investing, you need to first know how, when, where, and with 
how much you want to exit. For example, if someone came to you 
and said, “What is the first thing you should do before planning 
a vacation?” one answer should be, “Well, where do you want 
to go?” Or if someone asked you, “What should I study?” the 
answer would be, “Well, what do you want to become after you 
graduate?” The same is true with investing. Before deciding what 
you should invest in, you should first know where you want to 
wind up. That is why rich dad repeatedly said, “Knowing your exit 
strategy is an important investment fundamental.”
 Many people invest because they recognize that the company they 
work for or the government is not going to take care of them after 
their working days are over. Many people are investing today for 
their long-term financial security. While it is good that many more 
people are investing today, I am afraid many investors did not give 
much thought to their exit strategy before they began investing.
How Much Will You Have When You Stop Working?
A number of years ago, someone gave me the following statistics from 
the federal government. Although the statistics are a few years old, I do 
not think the ratios or the dollar amounts have changed much.
Using the benchmark of age 65 as when most people plan on retiring, 
or exiting, the question is: How much income do you want when your 
working days are over? The government tracked people from ages 20 to 
65 and found that, by the age of 65, for every 100 people:
36 were dead
54 were living on government or family support
  5 were still working because they had to
  4 were well off
  1 was wealthy
Chapter Nine120
These statistics appear to verify my earlier statement that most people 
seem to have a plan on working hard all their lives and retiring poor. 
Either they planned on retiring poor or they did not pay attention to 
their financial plan or their exit strategy.
Looking at these statistics, the question is: When you are age 65, 
which group do you want or plan to be in when you exit? My poor dad, 
although highly educated and hardworking, continually went back to 
institutions of higher learning for more education, and yet still wound 
up in the group that was at the bottom of the heap at the end of his life. 
My rich dad, on the other hand, wound up far, far off the chart in the 
rich category. Although both men more or less started with nothing, they 
each had a different plan and exit strategy. One planned on retiring poor, 
and the other planned on retiring rich. Although both men kept working 
after age 65, the difference was that one had to keep working and the 
other worked because he enjoyed working.
What Is the Goal of Your Exit Strategy?
After looking at the government statistics, I realized that further 
distinctions needed to be made in order to obtain a more useful chart 
to determine one’s financial exit strategy. Taking these U.S. government 
statistics, I added further dollar distinctions to those statistics, based upon 
the year 2000 dollar valuations. Upon retirement at age 65, the income 
without working falls into these categories:
Poor  $25,000 or less per year
Middle class $25,000 to $100,000 per year
Affluent $100,000 to $1 million per year
Rich  $1 million or more per year
 Ultra-rich $1 million or more a month
The unfortunate reality is that only one out of 100 Americans will 
reach the affluent level or higher when they exit the workforce. Chances 
are that 36 out of 100 will be dead, as the government  statistics state. 
These 36 will exit this earth prior to exiting the workforce. That means 
that 59 out of the 64 people remaining will exit below the affluent level. 
Retire Young Retire Rich121
Only five go beyond that level. One reason for this is a slow financial plan 
without a clearly defined exit strategy.
In my investment seminars, I often ask investors, “Which group do 
you want to be in once your working days are over.” In other  words, 
“What is your targeted exit level?” I find it interesting that most people 
are happy to simply wind up in the middle-class exit category. I then say, 
“If you are happy there, then keep riding the slow train. The slow train 
will get you there.” I explain further by saying, “The slow train follows 
the schedule of finding a safe job, working hard, living below your means, 
saving money, and investing for the long term.”
When I am asked, “Can I get to the affluent level on the slow train?” 
my answer is, “Yes, you can get there with a safe, secure, high-paying job, 
but you must begin investing young, live frugally, invest a large portion 
of your income, hope that the market does not crash, and be willing to 
retire after age fifty-five.” Explaining further I say, “There is a price for 
using this plan of job security and frugality to reach the affluent level. The 
price is that it is often difficult to move on to the rich and ultra-rich level 
using such a conservative plan.” If all you want is to retire at the middle-
class or affluent levels, then you do not need this book. There are many 
books written for those levels or for people with that context and reality. 
The middle-class level and affluent level are great levels to exit at. But  
I feel a deep concern for the approximately 50 percent of the population 
that will not reach those levels.
Take the Fast Train
If you are starting life with very little as I did, and want to retire 
young and retire rich at the rich or ultra-rich levels, you will most 
likely need to forsake job security and take the fast train. In order 
to take the fast train, a person will need an open mind, high-speed 
ideas, better business and investment education, and a faster plan. In 
other words, these people will need to operate from a different mental 
context and content than that of the masses. People who use the job 
security and long-term investment plan to reach the affluent level often 
arrive without the content, context, and capacity to handle the rigors 
of the rich and ultra-rich levels. In other words, they may arrive with 
Chapter Nine122
money, but without the reality required for the rich and ultra-rich 
levels. As my rich dad said, “There is more to being rich than having a 
lot of money.”
My wife, Kim, and I decided to exit the Rat Race of life at the 
affluent level. That was our goal. Once we decided on our goal in 
1985, we worked backward and developed our exit strategy, our 
investment plan, and then and only then did we determine our entry 
strategy. Once we had our exit strategy, we knew what to do and where 
to begin. For us, it was to ride on the fast train to build a business and 
invest in real estate. It meant giving up a few weekends and watching a 
little less TV. It meant having friends and relatives asking, “Why don’t 
you get a job?” and “Why do you work so hard?”
The hard work, lack of job security, and following the rigid schedule 
riding the fast train paid off. We achieved our goal from our investments 
when she was thirty-seven and I was forty-seven. It took nine years from 
the time the plan was created until we achieved our goal. We created 
our plan in 1985 and exited in 1994. In 1985, we chose a plan that 
would get us to the affluent level quickly, as well as give us the required 
education and experience that qualified us to move on to the rich and 
ultra-rich levels. The key word here is qualified , which will be explained 
further in this chapter and in following chapters.
Because our investments brought us more than $100,000 in 
passive income per year, we were able to move on to the rich level 
simply because we had time, money, and the basic qualifications. We 
went from the affluent level to the rich level in five years. Next stop is 
the ultra-rich level of residual income. 
In theory, our basic plan through all levels was simple. It was to 
build businesses and invest in real estate. Today, we continue to build 
businesses and invest in real estate. While the plan has remained 
simple, what has increased is our education and experience. It is 
the education and experience that allow us to increase the speed at 
which we build businesses and buy real estate. In other words, we made 
mistakes, corrected, and learned. By making those mistakes and learning, 
what has changed is the size of our context, our content or knowledge, 
our capacity to handle larger projects and dollar amounts, and the speed 
Retire Young Retire Rich123
at which we process these larger and more complex facts and figures. 
Taking the fast train gave us different business and investor qualifications 
than those who reach the affluent level using the slow train.
We started out slowly, but we gained education, experience, and 
friends of the same mindset. As we progressed along our simple plan, 
our context, content, capacity, and the speed at which we can build a 
business or acquire income-producing real estate has accelerated. At a 
time when many of my peers are reaching their peak income-earning 
years, our income potential is just starting to take off. At a time when 
many of my peers are happy to be earning $80,000 to $350,000 a year, 
our income is boarding the very fast train. The good thing is that we 
are working less and less, while earning more and more. Things are 
going according to plan.
When I was in high school in the 1960s, my poor dad earned far 
more money than my rich dad. By the time I was in college, my rich 
dad was earning more than 20 times what my poor dad earned, even 
though my poor dad was at the height of his income-producing years. 
By the time both men were in their mid-sixties, my poor dad was 
barely surviving financially. If not for Social Security and Medicare, 
he would have been living on the streets or moving in with his kids. 
At the same time, my rich dad’s net worth was estimated to have 
been over $150 million and climbing. By the time they were 65 years 
of age, my rich dad was earning more in a year than my poor dad 
earned in his entire lifetime. Both men’s lives had gone according to 
plan. As former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich said, “T wo tracks 
are emerging, the Fast T rack and the slow track, and the absence of 
gradations between.”
2.  Create a plan that works for you.
 I estimate that 90 percent of the population follows the same 
plan. That is why more than 99 percent of the population 
winds up below the affluent level. There are people who try and 
reach the affluent or rich level, but they fail to have their plan 
come true.
Chapter Nine124
 I emphasize the importance of creating your own plan because 
each of us needs to take into account our own strengths and 
weaknesses, hopes and desires. I knew I had to create my 
own plan because I was not academically smart like my poor 
dad. I was smart in other areas, but not in the areas that our 
educational system recognizes as smart. One of the first steps in 
creating your plan is to find out what your innate genius is and 
the process by which you learn best.
 In my book Rich Kid Smart Kid , I write about the seven different 
geniuses and four different ways of learning. The current system 
of education recognizes only one genius, the genius of verbal-
linguistic, the ability to read and write, and only one way of 
learning. My poor dad assisted me in finding my genius and 
my way of learning, even though it was not recognized by the 
organization he headed, the government’s education department. 
Today I earn my money, not by what I learned in school, but by 
what I learned following my own plan.
 Even if you are no longer in school or do not have children, it 
might be a good exercise for you to find out your own genius 
and  your own personal learning style. If you want to retire 
young and retire rich, knowing your genius and the unique way 
you learn is an important part of the plan.
Leaving the Path of Job Security
I clearly remember the day Larry and I left the Xerox Corporation 
in the late 1970s. That was my last traditional job. T wenty years later, 
many of my peers at Xerox are now worried about being downsized due 
to Xerox’s technical and financial challenges. The gap in 20 years has 
widened by more than just money. It is a gap of realities, old and new.
Retire Young Retire Rich125
A Change of Context
T wenty years ago, the smart thing to do was to find a job and 
climb the corporate ladder. I remember people not understanding 
why Larry and I were leaving such a great career opportunity with 
such a great company. After all, we were both number one in sales for 
different divisions, the company was still growing, and our futures 
seemed bright. Not only did it not make sense for us to leave during 
that economic era, the idea of leaving a high-paying job was not the 
accepted thing to do. The accepted thing to do was to work your way 
up the corporate ladder, and someday become a manager or even vice 
president of a region. When I talk to young people born after 1975, 
about the same time we were leaving Xerox, many of them do not 
want to climb the corporate ladder. For many of them, the thing to 
do is start your own company and take that company public through 
an IPO (initial public offering) and then retire young or start another 
company and take that public. The change in context in 25 years is 
very big. I have peers who do not even know what an IPO is, but their 
kids do. Their kids talk about becoming an entrepreneur or working 
with an entrepreneur who will take a company public because they 
want the Fast T rack to wealth. They want the Fast T rack rather than 
getting stuck in their parents’ financial Rat Race that will ultimately 
lead to the poorhouse for millions and millions of hardworking people 
of my generation.
 
How Are You Handling Change?
I have friends who hate changes in fashion, music, and technology. 
These friends hate rap music, do not have an online business, and 
are glad that so many dotcoms failed. These are some of the same 
people who continue to believe in job security, Social Security, and 
Medicare—all Industrial-Age ideas or promises.
While there are people who fight change, there are others who 
run away from change. I have other friends who are actively searching 
for jobs that cannot be affected or threatened by the Internet. One 
of them took a job as a teacher, not because he likes teaching kids, 
Chapter Nine126
but because he wanted a sanctuary from the changes going on in the 
world. He wanted a job where he could have job security and not be 
fired. The school system was his shelter from the world of change.
Another friend bought a business that could never be affected by 
the Internet. She said, “I’m too old to learn how to do business online 
so I want a business that is Internet-proof. I don’t have any money for 
retirement so my plan is to work until I am unable to work anymore.”
These examples show realities or contexts that are not changing 
with the times. These people will most likely fall behind in the 
ever- widening gap between the middle class and the rich. The ship 
is leaving the dock for the land of greater opportunities, riches, and 
wealth, and many people are choosing to be left behind, simply 
because they are not able to change their mental context. They are 
stuck in a time that has passed.
How to See the Future
On a flight from London to New York, I sat next to a high-level 
executive from IBM. After we got to know each other, I asked him, 
“How do you prepare for the future?” His reply was, “The mistake 
adults make when looking at the future is that they see the future from 
their own eyes. That is why so many adults cannot see the changes that 
are coming. If you want to see how the world will be in ten years, just 
watch a fifteen-year-old boy or girl. Observe the world from their eyes 
and you will see the future.
“If you can let go of your vision of the world and actually see 
the world from a younger person’s point of view, you will see a 
much bigger world, a world filled with tremendous change and an 
abundance of opportunities yet to come. There are business and 
investment opportunities coming that will create bigger fortunes than 
the automobile did for Henry Ford, oil did for John D. Rockefeller, 
computers did for Bill Gates, and the Internet did for the young 
founders of Yahoo, Google, and Facebook.”
I then asked, “Will we soon see a high-school teenager become a 
self-made billionaire?”
His reply was, “I’d bet money on it.”
Retire Young Retire Rich127
If you are not rich today because you missed the last boat leaving 
the dock, do not worry. Another boat to the land of riches and 
opportunity is getting ready to sail. The question is: Will you be on it?
History Repeats Itself
One of my favorite subjects in school was economics and economic 
history. Economic history is often associated with the leading economist 
of any given time. Some of these economists are Adam Smith, David 
Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, and John Maynard Keynes. The stories of 
their lives and how they saw the world are very interesting studies in 
how technology, humans, and economics have evolved.
One period of economic history was named after a group of people 
called Luddites. Luddites were people who banded together to attack 
and destroy factories and the machinery in the factories because they 
were afraid of losing their jobs. Today, when someone says a person 
is a Luddite, they’re often referring to a person who is attacking 
technological change, or threatened by technological change, or simply 
hoping the technology will just go away and leave the world alone. 
While the original Luddites are long gone, modern-day Luddites have 
replaced them. History does have a way of repeating itself.
Are You Frozen in Time?
Many of us have seen programs on TV where the host takes a 
person who dresses horribly and transforms him or her, from geek to 
sheik, with a makeover. A team of hairstylists, image consultants, and 
color specialists swoop in on this person who is a fashion disaster and 
turn him or her into a fashion miracle. Some of the transformations 
are truly amazing and some are even life-changing.
A friend of mine is one of the top professional image consultants 
in the world, which means he gets paid to dress and improve the image 
of rich people. He is one of the people I pay to dress me. The reason  
I pay to have someone choose my clothes and cut my hair differently 
is because I do not want to become frozen in time. Instead, I want to 
be moving with time, in sync with the changes in context and content. 
The reason I change my image is because it helps me to be in sync  
with time as compared to being frozen in time, a time that has passed.
Chapter Nine128
This professional image consultant once said to me, “A person 
often gets frozen in a time when they were most excited about life. 
It could be that period when they felt the most successful, had the 
most fun, felt the most alive, the most sexually active, or all of the 
above. That is why you see men and women of my age who still look 
like hippies. Many of them felt very alive during the years of protest 
against the Vietnam War. And on the flip side, that is why you see so 
many veterans of the same era who still wear their military fatigues. 
The war was a period when they too felt most alive or that their lives 
meant something.”
When you see people wearing their college sweatshirts even though 
they graduated years ago, it is also a longing for the past through their 
clothes. Another example of being frozen in time is when people grow 
older and begin to act, look, and dress more and more like their parents. 
The opposite of that is a person who begins to dress in kids’ clothes, 
trying to look younger or go back to a time when they were most 
attractive. Those are cases of being stuck in the past rather than changing 
with the times. It shows up in the way they dress. It is not really about 
changing clothes, but about being frozen in a context. These people 
often become more rigid and less flexible the older they get.
Why You Don’t Want to Be Stuck in the Past
We have all seen people who overdo fashion or people who try to 
look too trendy or too hip. That is not what I am talking about. One 
of the reasons I recommend dressing fashionably smart is because you 
want to be in sync with the times. If you are not on the front line of 
what is happening, then you are in the past.
If you are in the past, then you tend to do or invest in investments 
that are also in the past. Investments that are of a time that has passed 
go down rather than making you rich. One of the reasons people 
buy investments whose time has passed is because the one doing the 
investing may also be stuck in the past.
Retire Young Retire Rich129
What Is Going to Happen
If you want to retire young and retire rich, you need to invest  
in what is going to happen, rather than what has already happened.  
In the world of investing, there is a lot of truth to that old saying,  
“The early bird gets the worm.”
Seeing the Future Makes You Rich
Rich dad often said to his son and me, “If you want to be rich, you 
need to develop your vision. You need to be standing on the edge of 
time, gazing into the future.” Rich dad would tell us stories of how John 
D. Rockefeller became rich because he saw the growing importance of 
oil due to the growing demand for automobiles. He also reminded us of 
how Henry Ford could see the middle class wanting cars of their own, 
at a time when only the rich had cars. Today in more modern times, 
Bill Gates became a billionaire because he saw the growth in PCs while 
IBM’s older and wiser men saw the future in mainframes. The older 
men of IBM did not think like Henry Ford and so they lost the future 
for IBM and gave it to Microsoft. If I were an investor in IBM, I would 
have those men of blindness fired and have them pay their wages back. 
Instead, they received bonuses, and the investors lost their future. The 
young people who brought you Yahoo, Google, Facebook, and other 
famous Internet companies became billionaires before they graduated 
from college because they saw the future.
If you missed the boat heading for the oil fields, the computer age, 
or the Internet age, do not worry. There is another boat sailing. But 
if you are stuck in the past, your chances of missing the next boat or, 
worse yet, climbing on the Titanic  because it is big and safe, are pretty 
good—especially today with the context and content of the world 
changing so quickly.
In the movie Top Gun , there is a classic line that all fighter pilots 
say, “Take the shot! Take the shot!” If you saw the movie, you may 
recall that the time available to take the shot at the enemy aircraft is 
measured in split seconds. If you wait too long or are unprepared, you 
will miss the opportunity. The same is true in the world of money. The 
Chapter Nine130
window of opportunity to take the shot is also narrow. If you are frozen 
in time, stuck in the past, dressing like your mom or dad, unprepared, or 
lacking the business and investment skills required, you might not even 
see the opportunity. You will not only miss the window of opportunity, 
you may take shots at opportunities that are also frozen in time and not 
going anywhere.
A friend came up to me and said, “I took your advice, and I 
invested in a rental property. I bought a $150,000 duplex in a good 
neighborhood. It’s a good start, isn’t it?”
I did congratulate the person, for it is just that. It is a good start. The 
problem is, he is taking a shot at a target whose time has passed. He is 
late to the party. He did not take the shot when he should have. Yet it is 
a good start, and a good start is often better than not starting at all. It’s 
a good start because, even if he loses money, at minimum he will gain 
priceless knowledge and experience.
Nonetheless he did not take the shot when he should have.  
I say that because he was with Kim and me when we were taking our 
shots between 1989 and 1994. Kim and I were buying into a falling 
market. When we told him he should be buying also, he said, “No, it’s 
too risky. I might lose my job. You know they’re downsizing a lot of 
people. Besides, real estate prices are too low and falling. What if they 
keep falling? What if we go into a depression?”
The window of opportunity had opened, and it had closed. Ten years 
later, when real estate prices were at their peak and the stock market 
began to wobble, my friend realized that he should begin shooting. He 
now shoots at targets that are old and going nowhere, just like him.  
He is frozen in time and is now shooting at targets that are frozen in time. 
At least he is starting to do something, but I am afraid he is paying a big 
price. That price is more than the high price of his overpriced duplex, an 
asset that gives him very little cash flow and will appreciate very slowly in 
value, if it ever does. At least he finally took his shot, even though it was 
at a target whose time has passed. 
I am very proud of him for taking that first step, a step away from his 
parents’ footsteps, the footsteps of the Industrial Age.
Retire Young Retire Rich131
Kim and I are still investing in our business and in real estate. The 
difference is that we are now watching for targets of opportunity that 
are developing in the future, not in the past. That is why you want to 
be in sync with the future and preparing to take the shot when the 
window of opportunity opens, as it did between 1989 and 1993. The 
windows of opportunity opened in both real estate and stocks between 
1989 and 1993. In 2001, the stock market crashed. The Nasdaq lost 
over 50 percent. The stock market only went down 42 percent in 1929. 
When downsizing  occurs again, my friend will panic. He realizes that 
he probably paid too much for his duplex. To me, the windows are 
preparing to open again.
In my investment seminars, I occasionally have Kim speak of her 
experience of investing. She often says we began investing in 1989 and 
stopped buying in 1994. She then adds that between 1985 and 1989, we 
were preparing  to invest, according to our plan. During that period, we 
were building our business and studying about investing in real estate. 
For those of you who remember that era, between 1985 and 1989 was 
an era of very high real estate prices. Kim and I were preparing to “take 
our shot” when the window of opportunity opened. When it opened, 
our friend panicked and we began buying. His plan did not include the 
preparation for the window of opportunity that had opened. Today, he 
is late to the party, investing in investments that are too expensive, and 
worst of all, he is not prepared for what is coming next. He dresses like an 
old man, although he is younger than I am, and he invests like an  
old man.
In American football, the winning quarterback is the person who 
can throw the football to a place where the receiver isn’t. In other words, 
the quarterback must in his mind see where the receiver will be and 
throw the ball there, even though the receiver isn’t there... yet. If the 
quarterback can do that on a regular basis, he will make the big bucks. A 
soccer player must also kick the ball to the spot where the opposing goalie 
isn’t. A person who plans on retiring young and retiring rich must also 
do the same thing. He or she must design their plan to be ready for an 
opportunity that is not here yet. That is why it is important to be in the 
present, in sync with the times, and gazing into the future.
Chapter Nine132
A Plan for the Future
If you are sincere about wanting to retire young and retire rich, 
your plan needs to have a plan for the future, a future that does not 
yet exist. Just as John D. Rockefeller was prepared for the future of 
the automobile, and Bill Gates and Michael Dell were ready for the 
computer age, you too must be prepared for the opportunities of the 
future. If you are not, you will invest in the investments of the past, and 
investments of the past often have no future.
How Do You See the Future?
In order to retire young and retire rich, you will probably need to 
train for the future, a future that does not yet exist. As the IBM executive 
said to me, “The mistake adults make when looking at the future is that 
they see the future from their own eyes. That is why so many adults 
cannot see the changes that are coming.” Maybe IBM has learned the 
lessons that young Bill Gates taught them. The lesson is: If you want to 
see the future, you need to see it through younger eyes. How you respond 
to changes in fashion, music, and technology reflects how you think and 
how flexible your mental context is. If you are stuck in the past or out of 
sync with the present, you may miss the future entirely.
The other way to see the future is to study the past. In my reality, 
history does have a tendency to repeat itself, even though it may not 
repeat itself in exactly the same way. Many adults miss the future, or are 
run over by the future because their plans for the future have no vision of 
the past.
I was talking to a young reporter in San Francisco who was just out 
of college. When I told her that mutual funds were risky and that I could 
see a crash coming, she became very angry. She then began quoting to me 
words and ideas her stockbroker had said to her: “The fund I am invested 
in has been the top-rated mutual fund for three years running. It has 
gone up by an average of 25 percent each year. The stock market is the 
best investment because, even though there are dips in the market, the 
market has gone up consistently for 40 years. It is the best place to invest 
your money.” She never aired the interview with me because my views 
did not fit her view of the future. Her sacred funds then went down over 
50 percent.
Retire Young Retire Rich133
While her facts and data are somewhat accurate, the problem is that 
her data does not go far enough back in time. If she knew her history of 
markets, she would have known that we have a depression every 75 years, 
on average. While this does not mean we will have a depression every  
75 years, that little bit of ancient history does explain why the market has 
gone up over the past 40 years. The last market crash and depression was 
in 1929. It took the market approximately 25 years to recover to 1929 
levels in the year 1955. I was talking to her in 1998, and so her facts were 
accurate that the market had gone up for 40 years. Her view of the future 
was hindered because her view of the future did not include enough of 
the past. 
One of the things my rich dad had me do was read books on 
economic history. A great book I recommend people read, if they want 
to understand the future, is the book The Worldly Philosophers , by Robert 
Heilbroner. It is a great book for anyone wanting to see the future by 
studying the past.
When I teach my investment classes, I have people fill out a financial 
statement. I then have them look at their past and ask them if what 
they also see is their future. If they do not like what they see, which is 
a financial statement filled with bad debt, bad income, bad expenses, 
bad liabilities, and no future, and if that is the picture of the future 
their financial statement is showing them, I advise them to begin to get 
unfrozen, get hip, throw out their old clothes, update their wardrobe, 
change their old friends, and begin to see the future. If you can change 
your context to be excited about the opportunities in the future, you have 
a better chance of retiring young and retiring rich.
As simple as some of those changes are, I am always amazed at how 
hard just cleaning out your closet and updating your clothes is for most 
people. Many people go out and buy new clothes, but they fail to update 
them. They just buy new clothes from the old era, the era of their life 
when life was fun and exciting or an era when they felt most successful. 
Many people are so afraid of the future, and the possibility that the future 
could be fun, hip, cool, and exciting, that they would rather stay stuck in 
the past.
I wrote in the introduction that retiring young and retiring rich was 
easy. It was not hard to do. Yet for many people, letting go of their past 
and stepping bravely into the uncertainty of the future is much harder 
Chapter Nine134
than becoming rich and retiring young. For millions of people, it is safer 
and more secure to stay stuck in the context, clothes, and collections 
of their parents and the past. That is why more than 50 percent of the 
population will retire at or near the poverty line. They climb on the slow 
train and ride it to the end of their lives, all according to plan.
Chapter Ten
THE LEVERAGE OF 
SEEING A RICH FUTURE135
When I show classes the following numbers for exit strategies, 
many cannot imagine a financially free future with more than 
$100,000 or more a year coming in without working.
Poor $25,000 or less per year
Middle class $25,000 to $100,000 per year
Affluent $100,000 to $1 million per year
Rich $1 million or more per year
Ultra-rich $1 million or more a month
The reason many people cannot imagine having that much money 
is because they do not have it in their reality. Many people may dream 
of such dollar amounts and may say that someday they will make that 
much, but in reality, most people are just dreaming. The statistics 
verify this reality.
Your Future Is Created T oday
Many people do not realize their financial goals because they 
use such words as someday , maybe , or in the future . Rich dad always 
said, “Your future is created by what you do today, not tomorrow.” 
When you look at the above figures, the question you may want to 
ask yourself is this: “Is what I am doing today going to get me to the 
financial goal I want tomorrow?”
Chapter Ten136
The harsh reality is 99 percent of the U.S. population will end 
up just above the $100,000 mark. Most will follow in their parents’ 
footsteps following their parents’ plan. In other words, they will do the 
same thing and wind up on target.
Just after my return from Vietnam, I remember the frustration of 
earning only $900 as a Marine Corps officer when Mike was earning 
nearly a million dollars a year from his investments alone. I remember 
feeling defeated and depressed about the gap between his world and 
my world, his reality and my reality.
For those of you who read Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , you may 
recall rich dad sitting down with me prior to my leaving the Marine 
Corps and helping me develop a plan. As the book stated, “Investing is 
a plan, not a product or procedure.”
A Plan Is the Bridge to Your Dreams
Rich dad drew a rough sketch of a large river with me standing 
on the bank of one side of the river. He said, “A plan is the bridge to 
your dreams. Your job is to make the plan or bridge real, so that your 
dreams become real. If all you do is stand on this side of the bank and 
dream of the other side, your dreams will forever be just dreams. First 
make your plan real, and then your dreams will come true.”
Between 1985 and 1994, Kim and I worked on making our plan 
real rather than dreaming of our dreams. What we did is what most 
combat pilots do. We practiced every day, preparing for the day when 
our window of opportunity would appear. Once it appeared, we took 
our shots and then the window closed.
As rich dad said, “Your future is created by what you do today, 
not tomorrow.” In other words, what you are doing today is your 
future. The reason Kim and I did not take jobs, even though we were 
strapped for cash, was because we had no plans on being employees 
in the future. Instead we spent our time in seminars learning either 
how to build a business or invest in real estate. Even though we had 
no money, each and every day we practiced building better businesses 
and investing in real estate. We were doing today what we planned 
Retire Young Retire Rich137
on doing in the future. Today, we build businesses and invest in 
real estate. Tomorrow we will probably be building businesses and 
investing in real estate. I have no plans on doing what my poor dad 
did after he retired, which was to look for jobs so he could supplement 
his Social Security income. He started his life preparing to look for a 
job, and he finished his life looking for a job. By the year 2020, there 
will be millions of people my age doing the same thing my poor dad 
did, looking for a job to supplement their Social Security income. 
They will be doing tomorrow the same thing they are doing today.
A Change of Realities
There is another thing my poor dad did almost every day of his 
life. He always said, “I will invest when I have some money.” He also 
said on a regular basis, “I can’t afford it.” When pressed to take action, 
he would say, “Look, I don’t have time to do anything about it today. 
We’ll talk about it tomorrow.” That was his daily reality, and it was his 
reality at the end of his life. In my opinion, the primary reason he was 
poor was because he had a poor person’s reality, even though he made a 
lot of money, and he was not willing to change his reality.
As I said, the easiest way to get rich is to constantly change and 
improve your reality. Yet it is obvious that, for many people, changing 
their reality, changing what they do today, is the hardest part of 
becoming rich. When I go home to Hawaii, I see many of my friends 
who are doing exactly what their parents did. When my friends ask me 
what I do and I tell them I build businesses and invest in real estate, 
many of them say the same things my parents said, “I can’t do that,” or 
“You know I’ve been thinking about investing. Maybe someday when  
I have the money, I’ll begin to invest.” 
When I tell them about preparing and learning to invest before 
investing, they usually say, “Oh my, do you know how busy I am?  
I don’t have time to learn to invest. The government should have free 
courses on how to invest. Then maybe I would go take a few classes. 
Why should I pay to learn to invest? Anyway, investing is too risky. I’d 
rather keep my money in the bank.” My rich dad would say, “Listen to 
their words and you will see their future.”
Chapter Ten138
If you want to retire young and retire rich, you may want to begin 
by listening to your words and seeing your future. Ask yourself, “If  
I keep using these words and thinking these thoughts, at which level 
will I exit? Will it be poor, middle class, affluent, rich, or ultra-rich?”  
If you are truthful and want to change your plans, the first thing to  
do is change your reality by changing your plans, your words, and  
your daily actions. Your future is what you do today, regardless of  
your dreams. As rich dad would say, “It’s tough to meet your fairy 
prince or fairy princess if all you do every day is sit on the couch, 
watch TV, and eat bonbons.”
Start Your Future T oday
Why is it that so many people will retire poor and retire old? They 
cannot stop doing what they are doing, even though it has no future. 
They cannot change their context of job security, hard work, and 
saving money. Many people will grow old, wear clothes from a time 
that has passed, cling to ideas from their parents and the Industrial 
Age, and then fall out of sync with the present and with the future. It 
is not a matter of a person’s age. It is a matter of a person’s context.
So how does a person begin their rich and free future today? 
Again, the good news is that it begins in your mind. It begins with 
your words, your thoughts, and your actions each and every day. It 
begins by taking stock of where you spend your time and with whom 
you spend your time. It begins with knowing that you must make 
your plan real in order to build a bridge from where you are, over the 
roaring waters to your dreams. As rich dad said, “Dreamers dream 
dreams. Rich people create plans and build bridges to their dreams.” 
Start your future today by creating a plan to the future. For many 
people, one of the first steps on the plan is to stop doing today what 
you do not want in your future. If you do not want to work hard all 
your life for ordinary income, start asking yourself how you can learn 
to work for passive and portfolio income. Once you come up with 
some answers, make those answers a part of your plan. It may mean 
studying more, reading more books, listening to tapes, attending more 
Retire Young Retire Rich139
seminars, starting a home-based business, and meeting new friends. In 
other words, do today what you want for your tomorrows.
How Do You See the Future?
I am also often asked, “How do I see the future if I cannot yet  
see it with my eyes?” or “How can I see a million dollars a year when  
I cannot see $50,000 a year today?”
That is an excellent context-expanding question. The answer is 
found in something my rich dad said to me years ago. He wrote out  
in big words on his yellow tablet:
SIGHT is what you see with your  eyes. 
VISION  is what you see with your mind .
When I asked rich dad what improved a person’s vision, he said, 
“Words and numbers.” He stressed the importance of learning how to 
read financial statements because you could not see your financial future 
if you could not read financial statements. In fact, if you cannot read 
a financial statement, you cannot see your financial past, present, or 
future. I created the CASHFLOW  games to assist people in improving 
their mind’s vision by teaching them the numbers and vocabulary of 
rich people. One thing that has worked for many people is to get a 
group of friends together to play CASHFLOW 101  on a regular basis. 
Once you have CASHFLOW 101  mastered you may want to teach it to 
others and inspire them to take action, and/or you may want to move 
on to  CASHFLOW 202 , the more advanced game. As you play, always 
remember rich dad’s statement, “Your future is today.” When people ask 
me how I became rich so quickly, I say, “I play the game every day.” The 
reality is, the more you play the game, the more you teach the game, and 
the more you make the game a part of your life, the better your vision of 
the future will become. As rich dad also said, “If you want healthy teeth 
in the future, brush your teeth today.”
Chapter Ten140
Fast Words for Fast Plans
If you want to create a fast plan, you need to learn to use  fast 
words. Many people cannot get rich quickly because they use slow 
words rather than fast words in their plan. If you want to improve 
your vision of getting rich faster, you need to use faster words.
If you want to retire young and retire rich, if you want to get rich 
more quickly, you need to use more up-to-date, more hip, faster words 
of business and investing. Not using faster, more efficient words would 
be like a professional woodcutter saying, “I don’t care if I can chop 
more wood with a chain saw and make more money. My dad gave me 
this axe and I plan on using this axe until the day I die.” Many people 
today are going to work and still use their mommy and daddy’s axe to 
make and invest their money.
 
Are You Swinging Your Daddy’s Axe?
After telling the story of chopping wood with an axe rather than 
using a chain saw, I ask people if they are still swinging their daddy’s axe.
After a puzzled moment and some puzzled looks, I am occasionally 
asked, “Are you asking me if I am still doing things like my parents, 
when it comes to managing my money?”
My reply is “Yes. That is exactly what I am asking.” I continue, 
saying, “Many people today are not in the same professions as their 
parents. But when it comes to money, investing, and retirement, they do 
exactly the same things. When it comes to money, many people are still 
swinging their parents’ axe.”
If asked to explain further, I say, “Words are tools just as an axe is a 
tool. When it comes to money, millions of people use word tools that 
are as slow and antiquated as using an axe to chop wood.”
T ools for Your Brain
In one of the classes I taught, a bright young woman asked, “Do 
you mean to say that when it comes to money, there are fast words and 
slow words?”
Retire Young Retire Rich141
My reply was, “That’s exactly what I mean. If money is an idea, then 
ideas are made up of words. Most people use slow words, which leads to 
them having slow ideas, which means they acquire wealth slowly.”
“Words are tools?” the young woman said quietly, just loud enough 
for the people around her to hear.
Nodding, I said, “My rich dad said, ‘Words are tools for your brain. 
The reason so many people struggle financially is because they give their 
brain old, slow, and obsolete tools to use. If you want to be rich, you first 
need to update your tools.’”
“Can you give me an example of old and slow word tools?” she asked.
“Sure,” I replied. “Most people think it is smart to save money. 
Saving money is slow. You can become rich saving money, but the price is 
time—your lifetime. So to me, save is a slow word. My poor dad taught 
me how to save money. My rich dad did not save. Instead, he taught me 
how to raise capital.”
“But what if someone does not know how to raise capital?” asked 
another student.
 “Then it is best you save money or invest some time learning how to 
raise capital. Raising capital is a learned skill.”
“But isn’t it difficult to ask people for money?” asked a student.
“It was for me at first, just as learning anything new is. It’s just like 
learning to ride a bike. I was very nervous at the start and made mistakes 
at the beginning, and I still make mistakes today. Yet I learn from those 
mistakes, so my education and experience make raising capital easier and 
easier the older I get. There are other people who are getting older and 
older and are still trying to get ahead by working hard and saving money. 
That is a very slow plan using old and slow word tools they probably 
inherited from their parents.”
“So while I struggle to save $100 a month, you can raise millions 
of dollars in the same time,” another student chimed in. “That is what 
you mean by words are tools, and that some words are fast and others 
are slow.”
I just nodded and said, “Words are tools for your brain.”
Chapter Ten142
Plan to Use Faster Words
If you plan on creating a plan to retire young and retire rich, you 
may need to update your vocabulary. If you change your vocabulary, 
you may speed up your ideas. For example:
          Slow Words Fast Words  
          High-paying job Cash flow
My poor dad always advised: “Get a high-paying job.” 
My rich dad always advised: “You want cash flow from assets.”
Finding a high-paying job may seem like the fast way to get rich 
at the start, but in most cases it is the slow way to become rich in the 
end. Remember my poor dad earned more money than my rich dad 
at the beginning of their careers, but by the end of their lives, the gap 
between their incomes was as wide as the Pacific Ocean. In fact, very 
few people ever become rich via a job ... even a high-paying one. The 
following are some of the reasons why cash flow from assets is better 
than income from a job.
Let’s review the three different types of income:
Ordinary income  50%
Portfolio income  20%
Passive income  0%
Ordinary income , in most cases, is income that comes from  
a person’s labor or work.
Portfolio income , in most cases, is income from paper assets such  
as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds.
Passive income , in most cases, is income from real estate.
As always, before making any financial decision, it is very important 
to have competent professional advice on any matter involving taxes. 
What may be legal tax planning for one person could be a tax violation 
for someone else. The point of this section is to know the difference that 
words can make. There is a substantial tax difference between ordinary 
income and passive income. As far as leverage goes, taxes for most people 
Retire Young Retire Rich143
are reverse leverage or negative leverage. A person who works hard for 
ordinary income has to work at least twice as hard as someone who 
works hard to earn passive income. Working for ordinary income is 
like taking two steps forward, and then taking one step back.
They Tax You Even After You Stop Working
People who say, “Work hard, save money, and invest in a 401(k)” 
are working for 50-percent money. Once you retire and you begin 
to withdraw money from your 401(k) plan, that money exiting the 
plan is then taxed at the ordinary income rate, or 50-percent money, 
as my rich dad would call it. Interest from savings is also taxed at the 
ordinary-income rate.
Many people say, “I must continue to work because my Social 
Security income from the government does not cover my living 
expenses.” The moment a person begins to work for ordinary income to 
supplement their Social Security income, the government not only taxes 
your earned income, the government often begins to reduce your Social 
Security payments because you have a job. When my rich dad said, 
“Most people plan on being poor,” he knew what he was talking about. 
He was aware of the government’s laws regarding earned income after 
retirement. If you aren’t poor and you want to earn more money, the 
government won’t help you. Many retired people simply find it better to 
be poor and not go back to work for tax reasons.
The point is, choosing to use the words work hard , save money , and 
invest in a 401(k)  is choosing to use very slow words, which causes you 
to have a very slow financial plan. While choosing to use these words 
in your financial plan may allow you to reach the affluent level of 
$100,000 to $1 million a year in retirement income, those same words 
will in most cases not allow you to go on to the rich and ultra-rich 
levels of income. As rich dad said, “There is more to being rich than 
having a lot of money.” The rich use a different set of words and those 
words guide them to different life experiences such as learning how to 
raise capital rather than save money.
Chapter Ten144
Other words are:
          Slow Words Fast Words
          Save money Make money
Rich dad recommended that most people learn how to save money. 
But he himself did not save money. He said, “Focusing on saving 
money takes too much of my time, and there is not enough leverage 
in saving money.” Rich dad also said, “The money most people save 
is after-tax money.” For a person to save $10, the real dollar amount 
earned was $20 because it is ordinary income or 50-percent money. 
On top of that, the interest that you earn on your savings is also 
subject to higher taxes.
Instead of focusing on saving money, rich dad spent his life 
training himself to make money. He said, “If you know how to build 
businesses and invest money, you can make so much money that your 
problem will be too much money. When you have too much money, 
you have excessive cash sitting in your bank rather than savings.”
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote about the two types of 
money problems. They are:
1. Not enough money, and 
2. Too much money. 
Most people only know the first problem, the problem of not 
having enough money. These people should definitely learn how to 
save money. My rich dad’s financial plan was to have too much money. 
His problem was that he had too much money sitting in his savings 
account and he was constantly looking for investments to move his 
excess money into. His reality or context was that the world had an 
abundance of money. My poor dad’s reality was that money was scarce 
and that is why he struggled all his life trying to save money.
What is the difference between working for money  and making 
money ? If you read Rich Dad Poor Dad , you may recall the story of 
me listening to my poor dad and trying to (literally) make money. 
I tried to make money by melting down lead toothpaste tubes and 
then casting quarters, dimes, and nickels in plaster-of-paris molds. 
Retire Young Retire Rich145
My poor dad had to explain to me the difference between making 
money  and counterfeiting . My poor dad was not able to tell me how 
to make money simply because all he knew to do was work for money. 
In the real world of money, many of the rich do become very rich 
by making money , rather than working for money. For example, Bill 
Gates became the richest man in the world not by working for money, 
but by making money . He became the richest man in the world by 
building a company and selling shares in his company.
Selling shares in your company is one form of making money . In 
principle, as long as there is a ready market of buyers and sellers for 
whatever you may produce, then you are, within this context, making 
money . My books, for instance, are a form of making money . As long 
as there is a market for them through booksellers, then my books are 
making me money rather than me working for money. If I were a doctor 
who had to personally work to get paid, then I would be a doctor who 
worked for money. If I were a doctor who invented a new medicine and 
sold it in the form of a pill through pharmacies, that pill would be a 
form of the doctor making money  rather than working for money.
In summary, working for money in most cases is slow. Finding 
ways to make money can be much faster if you know what you are 
doing. So if your plan is to work for money and then try and save 
money, then you may be swinging your mommy and daddy’s very slow 
and very dull axe.
There are other words that can slow your wealth creation down, and 
there are words that can increase the speed at which you make money.
          Slow Words Fast Words  
          Appreciation Depreciation
If you do not fully understand the terms appreciation  and 
depreciation , do not worry. It took me a while to fully understand 
them. If you really want to understand them better, you may want to 
ask an accountant or a professional real estate investor to explain the 
concepts to you. A brief example of how each of these terms applies to 
your financial plan follows.
Chapter Ten146
The other day, a television program ran a story about high school 
kids learning how to invest in the stock market. One of the students 
being interviewed said, “I made a lot of money because I bought shares 
of XYZ company and the price of those shares went up.” In other words, 
he was playing the market in the hopes of capital gains or appreciation  
in the value of the shares that he picked. When most people say, “Our 
home is a good investment,” they say that because they expect their 
house to appreciate in value.
I hear friends say statements such as, “I bought a lot in this new 
golf-course community. It’s a good investment, and I expect the lot 
will double in value in five years.” To them, such returns are a good 
investment, and hopefully they will realize a doubling of their money in 
five years.
Rich dad taught his son and me to use different words. When it 
came to buying any investment, he always said, “Your profit is made 
when you buy, not when you sell.” In other words, he never expected 
his investment to appreciate in value. If it did, to him, appreciation  was 
a bonus. Rich dad invested for immediate returns on his investment, or 
cash flow. He also invested for a thing he called “phantom cash flow,” 
aka depreciation. An example of depreciation of a building was given 
in an earlier chapter. He loved immediate cash flow and depreciation 
because he did not have to wait for his investment to appreciate in order 
for him to make money. He would say, “Waiting for a stock or piece of 
real estate to appreciate in value is too slow and too risky.”
The point is this, if you are waiting to make money sometime in the 
future, your plan is a slow plan because you are using slow words, which 
lead to slow ideas. Repeating my rich dad: “Your profit is made when 
you buy, not when you sell.” I meet so many people who buy a piece of 
real estate, lose money on it each month, and say to me, “I’ll make my 
money back when the value of the property goes up and I sell it.”
In Australia, many people buy property, lose money on it every 
month, and think it is a good investment because the government gives 
them a tax break for losing money. In my opinion, that is a loser’s way 
of thinking. I often ask them, “Why not buy a property that makes you 
Retire Young Retire Rich147
money every month and get a tax break every month.” The response  
I often get back is, “No, my accountant told me to look for a property 
that costs me money every month and gives me a tax break.” Talk 
about choosing to board the slow risky train rather than the fast more 
profitable train.
          Slow Words Fast Words
          Avoid risk Gain control
My poor dad said, “That’s too risky,” or “Play it safe,” or “Why 
take the risk?” The more he believed in those ideas, the more he lost 
control  over his financial life. By being an employee playing it safe, 
he lost control over his taxes. By saying that investing was risky and 
he was not interested in money, he lost more and more control over 
his financial education. In the end, he paid more and more in taxes, 
even though retired, and invested only in safe investments that went 
nowhere or lost money.
I have a distant relative who spent 25 years in the military, 
retired as an officer, and today sits in front of the TV set watching 
the financial television shows, watching the value of his stock sink 
lower and lower. He gets more and more depressed simply because 
he has no control over the value of his portfolio. One day, he saw the 
president of one of the companies he owns a substantial number of 
shares in flying in their new private jet, announcing that his staff were 
all getting million-dollar bonuses. While he joined the chorus of irate 
shareholders, there was very little that he could do.
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote about rich dad’s ten 
investor controls. These controls are vital to anyone who wants to 
have some degree of control over their life and their future. At present, 
my concern is that 90 percent of the population of the United States 
and many other Western countries have very little control over their 
financial future. That percentage is even worse in developing nations.
Rich dad told me to have a plan on learning how to have more 
and more control over my financial future. He said, “In order to be a 
player on the Fast T rack, you will need to have a plan on how to gain 
Chapter Ten148
more and more control. On the Fast T rack, control counts more than 
money.” If you would like to know more about these ten controls, you 
may want to read or reread Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing .
A final word on risk versus control: Rich dad said, “The more a 
person seeks security, the more that person gives up control over their 
life.” Today I see two worlds evolving. One is the world I call “the 
Responsible Society.” It is the group that believes in being responsible 
for their lives and the ultimate outcome of their lives. There is another 
world that I call “the Victim Society,” which is the group that believes 
that someone else—a company, or the government—is responsible for 
their lives. In any group, family, or company, there are usually both 
types of societies. Both see the world from their own context or reality 
and both think they are right. I have found that one of the dividing 
factors between both societies is their core view on the ideas of risk 
versus control . Victims tend to want to give control over their lives to 
someone else in order to avoid taking risks. Then they get angry when 
they feel someone abuses the control they granted the abuser in the 
first place. In other words, victims are often victims of themselves.
In the coming years, there will be many financial victims—people 
who gave control over to financial professionals and bought their 
advice hook, line, and sinker. Many of the future victims will have 
believed the mantra of “Invest for the long term, diversify, go long 
and hold, the market has gone up over the last 40 years, and play it 
safe.” These victims bought these words of advice simply because they 
wanted to believe the words. If they failed to choose their advisors 
wisely, they may become financial victims.
          Slow Words Fast Words  
          Mutual funds Regulation D, Rule 506
Today, millions and millions of people are betting their financial 
future and their financial security on stocks and mutual funds. 
Personally, I do not have much faith in the stock market. I also find 
that mutual funds are too slow and require me to use my own money. 
As I said earlier in this book, I would rather use borrowed money to 
Retire Young Retire Rich149
get rich rather than use my own money, and banks will not let me 
borrow money to buy mutual funds.
The other reason I say that mutual funds are slow is because the big 
profits or appreciation in any paper asset is made at the formation of 
the company, prior to the company going public. When rich investors 
begin investing in the share of a company, they are often investing 
according to the terms and conditions spelled out by the SEC’s (Securities 
and Exchange Commission) Regulation D, Rule 506, and other such 
regulations. In other words, the rich invest in shares of a company when 
the company is still a private company. The public invests in shares of 
a company after it becomes a public company. The differences can be 
enormous. For example, if you had invested $25,000 in Intel prior to it 
going public, that $25,000 might be worth more than $40 million today, 
depending upon the ups and downs of the stock market.
The point is, the rich have already made their money prior to the 
public even being aware that the company exists. That means the rich 
often invest with much lower risk and with the potential of much higher 
returns. By the time a mutual fund buys shares of the company, the profits 
have already been made. Then the general public buys the mutual fund 
that has purchased the shares of the public company, the same company 
that the rich invested in while it was still private. In other words, instead 
of investing in a mutual fund or public stock, the rich have invested via 
a private placement memorandum, also known as a 506 Reg D. The 
difference in the potential speed of getting rich between mutual funds and 
IPOs or 506 Reg D’s is astounding. As rich dad said, “Investing in mutual 
funds is investing at the end of the food chain.”
I can hear some of you saying, “IPOs were good in the heyday of a 
bull stock market, but not in a down or bear market.” There is some truth 
to that statement, yet regardless of the market, the rich are always offered 
private investments that are not offered to the general public. That is why 
knowing the words, vocabulary, and the jargon of the investments of the 
rich improves your chances of becoming richer quicker.
In the near future, the rich will get richer because they will be 
involved in pre-IPO offerings. They will not be investing in technology or 
Chapter Ten150
computers or dotcoms. Instead they will be investing in hot new biotech 
companies, genetic engineering companies, and new companies with the 
words system  or network after their names. They will be investing in the 
hot companies of the future, companies that we have not heard of yet. 
They will invest in companies and real estate projects that the average 
person will hear about only after the profits have been made. They will be 
investing in private placement memorandums, or limited partnerships, 
and other such investment vehicles, rather than mutual funds.
          Slow Words Fast Words
          Pay retail Buy wholesale
Most of us know that there is always a wholesale price as well as a 
retail price. The same is true in investing. The rich get richer because they 
pay the wholesale price rather than the retail price.
When you look at the CASHFLOW  board game, you will see the Rat 
Race and the Fast T rack. The Rat Race is where investors pay retail. The 
Fast T rack is where investors pay wholesale. The rich get richer because 
they are known as friends and family of people who have access to 
investments that are priced at the wholesale level.
          Slow Words Fast Words
          Buy shares Sell shares
Bill Gates did not become the richest man in the world by buying 
shares of Microsoft. He became the richest man in the world because 
he is what is known as a “selling shareholder.” The rich become rich 
because they are often the selling shareholders of a stock. To become a 
selling shareholder, you often need to be the founder or a friend or family 
member of the founder.
          Slow Words Fast Words
          Go to school Go to seminars
My poor dad went back to school often. That is why he attended 
the University of Chicago, Northwestern, and Stanford University—all 
excellent, prestigious schools. My real dad would come back excited, 
enthusiastic, and expecting a promotion because he had invested his time 
going back to school.
Retire Young Retire Rich151
My rich dad went to seminars. He said, “You go to school if 
you want to be a better employee or better professional person such 
as a doctor, lawyer, or accountant. If you don’t care about degrees, 
promotions, or job security, then you go to seminars. Seminars are 
for people who want better financial results than a job promotion or 
increased job security.”
I teach seminars rather than teach inside a school. Schools attract 
a different type of student than seminars do. For example, my wife, 
Kim, and I have an agreement that we go to at least two seminars a 
year together. We go together because we find that seminars, even 
bad ones, make our marriage, friendship, and business partnership 
stronger. Information or education has the power to bind people closer 
together by the common experience. It can also drive a wedge between 
them if they do not learn together.
Over the years, we have attended many seminars on marketing, 
sales, systems development, handling employees and, of course, 
investing. We attended a seminar on how to borrow money from the 
government to invest in low-income housing. The seminar cost only 
$85, was put on by the government, and we expect to make millions 
from what we learn. That is what I mean by people attending seminars 
for results rather than promotions.
I meet authors who did well in school as writers, but their books 
do not sell as well as mine do. When I suggest to them that they attend 
direct-marketing courses or sales-training courses or copy-writing 
classes, many get very indignant. As I said in Rich Dad Poor Dad , I am 
a best- selling author not a  best-writing  author.
The other day, I met a friend who sent his daughter to a relatively 
good state school. He was rather proud of the fact that he paid 
$85,000 over four years for her education. She has just found a job for 
$55,000 a year, and he is thrilled.
He then asked me how much my seminars cost, and I told him 
about $5,000 for three days. He gasped at the price and said, “I can’t 
afford that. That is too expensive for such a short amount of time.” 
When he asked what I taught in three days, I replied, “On day one, 
we cover how to build a business like Bill Gates did and take it public 
Chapter Ten152
via an IPO. We also cover on day one how to become a member of the 
friends and family level of the IPO, just in case you do not want to be 
like a Bill Gates and you only want to buy stocks at the wholesale level.” 
I then said, “On days two and three, we cover how to find real estate 
investments, how to quickly analyze them, and how to finance them. In 
other words, we teach you to think, negotiate, and analyze deals similar 
to how people like Donald T rump think and invest in real estate. On the 
last day, we teach people how to use options trading the way hedge-fund 
managers trade, which is not the same way mutual-fund managers trade. 
On top of that, we cover how to use corporations to pay less in taxes 
and protect your assets. You will meet inside investors from the Fast 
T rack who will tell you how to find the best leveraged investments in the 
world. And most importantly, you will meet people just like you who 
think just like you. In other words, you will probably make new friends 
who are moving at the same speed you are.”
All he could say was, “That is too much money for three days.”
As I said, there are slow words and fast words. For me, I would 
rather spend $5,000 and three days to learn how to make millions and 
possibly billions, rather than spend four years and $85,000 to learn how 
to work for $55,000 a year for the rest of my life. On top of that, that 
$55,000 is ordinary income.
There is one more source of fast, low-cost, high-impact education  
I use on a regular basis. In 1974 when I left the Marine Corps and knew 
I was not going to stay in the E quadrant like my poor dad, I began 
subscribing to recordings from the Nightingale-Conant Company. 
It has an audio library of some of the great business, motivation, and 
leadership masters in the world. I still remember buying Lead the Field 
by Earl Nightingale and listening to that tape program over and over 
as I drove around my sales territory, planning my escape from the E 
quadrant and the corporate world. In fact I still listen to that program 
about once a year while at the gym or in my car.
When people ask me “How do I find a mentor?” I often say, “Ask 
Nightingale-Conant for a catalogue and begin listening to some of the 
greatest mentors of all time.” As rich dad often said, “The truly rich get 
Retire Young Retire Rich153
rich at home and in their spare time.” He also said, “It is not your boss’s 
job to make you rich. That is your job.”
Some of the great masters in the Nightingale-Conant library are 
Sir John Templeton, founder of the Templeton Fund, Brian T racy, Zig 
Ziglar, Dennis Waitley, Og Mandino, Seth Godin, Harvey Mackay, and 
others. I have learned more, made more money, found new inspiration 
to carry on, came up with new ideas, or discovered new ways of doing 
things just while driving my car, working out in the gym, or going for 
a walk. The collection of masters at Nightingale-Conant is priceless, yet 
for less than a hundred dollars you can spend as much personal time as 
you want with some of the great teachers and masters of the world. All 
you have to do is rewind, and they will repeat exactly what you want to 
hear. I never received a college degree from these tapes, but I did find 
financial freedom and, most importantly, the confidence to be true to 
who I am.
Why Some People Only Seek Content
One of the big differences between those who go to school and 
those who attend seminars is again the difference between context  and 
content . I have noticed that when a person who attends schools asks a 
person who attends seminars, “What did you get from the seminar?” 
the person who attended the seminar is often not able to explain 
what he or she got. The reason is, many seminars are more context-
expanding than content-increasing. A person who has just had his or 
her context expanded often cannot say specifically what he or she got. 
A person who is school-oriented, a person who would rather remain 
an employee, often cannot understand such vagueness. A person who 
wants their context to remain the same, and only seeks to have his or 
her content increased, will not understand a person who is happy to 
have their reality expanded and is still waiting for the new content to 
appear. People wanting only content often become very upset if they 
have their context messed with. That is why they seek content versus 
an expansion of context. The good news is that both can get ahead, 
regardless of what they seek. Yet the people getting ahead the fastest  
are the people who seek to have both their context expanded and 
content increased.
Chapter Ten154
Is it Time to Get Out of the Rat Race?
The other day, a person said to me, “I played your CASHFLOW  
game once. Now what do I do?”
I replied with, “You played CASHFLOW 101  once? Only once?”
“Only once,” he replied.
“How long did you play the game?” I asked.
“About three hours,” he replied.
“Did you get out of the Rat Race?” I asked.
“No, I never did. But I got the lesson.”
“What was the lesson you got?” I asked.
“I got bored. I learned that being in the Rat Race is boring and 
tiring. I learned that I hate games so I am asking you to tell me what  
to do next. I don’t want to play games. I want to get rich. So tell me 
what to do next.”
I took out the game board pictured below and pointed to the circle 
labeled the Rat Race.
Slowly and deliberately, I began to say, still pointing to the Rat 
Race circle, “So to you, this game is only a silly game?”
Nodding, he smiled and said, “Yup. And I don’t want to play 
games. I want to get rich in real life.”
“And you don’t think this game is real life?” I asked.
“Nope,” he said with a slight smirk. “That game does not apply  
to me.”Fast Track
Rat Race

Retire Young Retire Rich155
“That’s interesting,” I said, still pointing to the Rat Race. “To me 
this game  is real life. Let me ask you this. Which track are you on? The 
Rat Race or the Fast T rack?”
The young man gave me a blank look in return and said nothing.
Continuing, I said, “To me, this game is real life. And in real life, 
each and every one of us is on one track or the other.” I happened to 
have the article from Robert Reich, the former Secretary of Labor, 
quoted at the start of Section T wo. Taking out the article, I read a 
quotation from Robert Reich:
It’s not simply a matter of having a job or even having decent  
pay anymore.
In the new economy, with unpredictable earnings... two tracks 
are emerging, the fast track and the slow track, and the absence of 
gradations between.
“You mean the Fast T rack really does exist?” he asked.
Nodding, I said, “It does and so does the Rat Race. Ninety-nine 
percent of the U.S. population invests from the Rat Race. And those in 
the Rat Race are falling further and further behind. As Robert Reich says, 
there is an ‘absence of gradations between,’ which means you are either on 
one track or the other. So which track are you investing from?”
“Well, I have a high-paying job, and I make a lot of money. Doesn’t 
that mean I’m investing from the Fast T rack?” he asked.
“I don’t think so, but I don’t really know. You have to tell me. What 
are you investing in?” I asked. “Are you a millionaire, and do you earn over 
$200,000 annually?”
“I do have $350,000 in my 401(k) and I do earn over $120,000 a 
year. Doesn’t that mean I qualify for the Fast T rack?” he asked.
“I don’t think so,” I replied. “At least according to SEC regulations, 
you don’t qualify to be on the Fast T rack.”
“I don’t understand,” he said. “Would you tell me what I am missing?”
I took a deep breath, relieved to finally have him open his context or 
his mindset to new content or information. I have always found it difficult 
Chapter Ten156
to teach something to someone who thinks they know all the answers.  
We all know that it is difficult to put more water into a glass that is already 
full of water. It is also difficult to teach something new to someone whose 
mind is closed or already filled with other content.
Beginning slowly, I said, “I designed this game with two tracks 
because, to me, this game is the real game of life. In real life, each of us  
is on one track or the other. As Robert Reich says, there is an ‘absence  
of gradations.’”
“You mean we are either in the Rat Race, or we are on the Fast T rack?” 
he asked, now with a little more interest.
“Yes,” I said. “And the lesson from the game is how you and I can get 
out of the Rat Race. The purpose of the game is to open your mind to the 
possibility of you becoming rich and financially free from the Rat Race 
most of us know, free from the drudgery of spending your life working for 
money and living below your means. The more you play the game and the 
more you teach the game to others, the more your mind becomes open to 
that possibility, and the more real financial freedom becomes in your mind 
and in your content and context. If your mind is not open, chances are 
you will be one of the 99 out of 100 people who spends his or her life in 
the Rat Race.”
“Even if I make a lot of money?” he asked.
“Great question,” I said loudly. “Best question you could have asked. 
The answer is that money alone will not get you out of the Rat Race, and 
money alone will not allow you onto the Fast T rack. That is why my rich 
dad always said, ‘Money does not make you rich.’”
“Why?” he asked with a puzzled look. “Doesn’t it just take a lot of 
money to get onto the Fast T rack?”
“Another great question. And the answer is no,” I said. I was now 
relieved that his mind was opening up to new ideas rather than pretending 
to know all the answers. “It takes more than money to get out of the Rat 
Race, and it takes more than money to invest on the Fast T rack.”
“I don’t understand,” he said. “What does it take if it takes more than 
money? I can understand why it takes more than money to get out of 
the Rat Race. But I do not understand why it takes more than money to 
invest on the Fast T rack.”
Retire Young Retire Rich157
I collected my thoughts before answering his question. “Do you 
remember the advertisements in publications such as The Wall Street 
Journal  that have a picture of a well-dressed affluent-looking man 
holding up a sign on a street corner saying, ‘I have money to invest.’”
“Yeah, I did see those ads. I did not really understand them,” he 
replied softly and a little puzzled.
“Ads such as those were plentiful between 1995 and 1999. The 
message was that there were many individuals who had made a lot 
of money in the stock market or from their jobs, and they were now 
looking for investments of the rich, investments found on the Fast 
T rack. The problem was that, even though they had money, they 
still were not allowed into the better investments on the Fast T rack. 
Granted there are many flimsy and sometimes crooked deals on the 
Fast T rack that would have allowed him in, but the best deals are 
closed to most people, even though they have money.”
“Even though they have money?” he asked. “Why? I don’t understand.”
“Because money does not count on the Fast T rack,” I said. “In real-life 
investing, money only counts to those people stuck in the Rat Race.”
“Money does not count?” he said. “Why doesn’t money count?”
“Because everyone on the Fast T rack already has plenty of money. 
That is why money no longer counts. In order to get into the better 
investments on the Fast T rack, what counts is what you know or who 
you know.”
“You mean it’s what you bring to the table that counts, not the 
money,” he said quietly.
“You hit it right on the head,” I said, smiling. “Things aren’t 
different between the rich and the poor and the middle class. Things 
are opposite. One side thinks money is important. Then once you 
become rich, you find out money is no longer important.”
I spent the next few minutes showing him the different levels of 
exit strategies. I explained to him that many people are able to achieve 
the affluent level, which is $100,000 to $1 million of income. Yet if 
they achieved that level of income by working hard, saving money, and 
being frugal, they may not be allowed to invest in the investments that 
Chapter Ten158
the rich and ultra-rich invest in. Many are not allowed to invest simply 
because they have money, but they lack the education and experience 
required for the investments on the Fast T rack. They have money, but 
they do not bring anything else to the table.”
“So that is why there were those ads with affluent people holding 
up signs that read, ‘I have money to invest,’” said the young man 
whose mind was now gaining some new context. “They had money, 
but no one wanted their money because they were not prepared for the 
Fast T rack.”
“That’s correct,” I said. “And that is why my rich dad said, ‘There is 
more to being rich than having a lot of money.’”
“So what should I do?” asked the young man.
“Well, the first thing I would do is go back and play CASHFLOW 101  
at least a dozen more times. Play until you can get out of the Rat Race in 
under an hour, regardless of your profession, your salary, high or low, and 
what market conditions or setbacks you encounter in the game. Then take 
a look at the words on the Fast T rack, and look up some of the definitions 
of the words. After learning those definitions, begin to seek investors who 
do invest in Fast T rack investments. Spend time with them. Listen to their 
words, and begin to understand what is important to them, other than 
money. The more you can understand their words, the more you will be 
able to communicate with them and begin to see their world, the world of 
the Fast T rack.”
“Is that what you did?” he asked.
“No, that is what I do. That is what I do every single day of my life. 
As I said, this game is real life. You are either in the Rat Race, or you 
are on the Fast T rack.”
“So how did you get out of the Rat Race?” he asked. “I know that 
you started with nothing.”
“I had a plan. I had a plan on how to get out of the Rat Race. The 
big difference was that my plan was a rich plan from the start. It was a 
plan that would allow me to gain a lot of money, but more importantly, 
to gain the words, education, and experience required for the Fast T rack. 
Retire Young Retire Rich159
So invest some time by first choosing your exit strategy, and then begin 
to create and design your own plan that will include the education, 
experience, and the vocabulary required for the Fast T rack.”
The young man nodded. His mind was now open. “So many 
people retire, but do they remain in the Rat Race?”
“Most do,” I replied quietly. “Their lives went according to plan. 
They got on the slow train and stayed on the slow train all their lives.  
I did not want to get on the slow train, so I searched for a better plan, 
a plan that would work for me. I hope you find a better plan.”
The young man nodded his head and said quietly, “I will.”
Leveraging Your Plan
In my opinion, the reason so many people work hard all their lives 
and still wind up poor or stuck in the Rat Race of life is because they 
lived their lives according to a slow plan. An important step if you 
want to retire young and retire rich is to sit quietly and ask yourself, 
“What and whose plan am I following?”     
Other questions you may ask yourself are:
•  What is the exit strategy for my life?
• How fast are my words and my ideas?
• What track am I on today? 
• What track do I want to be on in the future?
•  What kind of income am I working for today?
•  What kind of income do I want for my tomorrows?
•  What is the long-term price of security?

Chapter Eleven
THE LEVERAGE OF  
INTEGRITY161
From 1985 to 1989, Kim and I did not have any passive or 
portfolio income. We were working diligently at building a business so 
that we could have more leveraged earned income. All the extra money 
we earned went back into building the business. We knew what kind of 
income we wanted, we knew the definition of the incomes we wanted, 
we knew that we had to convert ordinary income to passive and 
portfolio income, but we did not have anything to show when it came 
to those two incomes. As the years crept on, I could hear my rich dad 
saying, “The moment you make passive income and portfolio income a 
part of your life, your life will change. Those words will become flesh.”
Both my dads were sticklers for knowing the definitions of words. 
The difference was, they did not focus on the same words. One dad had 
me look up words for school, and the other dad had me look up words 
that pertained to money, business, and investing. There were many a 
night I sat up with my dictionary, looking up the different meanings to 
different words for both dads.
I meet many people who call themselves investors. When I ask 
them how much passive or portfolio income they have, many admit 
they don’t have much, if any, yet they claim to be investors. Both my 
dads said, “You’re only as good as your word. People who do not keep 
their word are not much good.” One of the reasons so few people retire 
young and retire rich is because they are not true to their word. They 
use words that to them are not real.
Chapter Eleven162
More Than Just Definitions
For those of you who have read Rich Dad Poor Dad , you will recall 
the different definitions both dads had for the words asset and liability . 
My poor dad assumed he knew the definitions of both words so he never 
bothered to look them up. It would not have done much good even if 
my poor dad had looked them up, simply because the definitions found 
in most academic dictionaries fail to clearly explain the differences.
I hated looking up the definitions of words, yet I continue to look 
up words I do not really understand. Why do I look them up? I look 
them up because, in my opinion, words are the most powerful tools 
available to human beings. As rich dad said, “Words are tools for the 
brain. Words allow the brain to see what the eyes cannot see.” He also 
said, “A person who uses poor words has poor ideas, and hence a poor 
life.” Take a moment to think about the profound impact just knowing 
the difference between ordinary earned, portfolio, and passive income 
has made on my life and many other lives. They are relatively simple 
words, but just knowing the difference can have a huge impact on  
your life.
If you want to change your financial future, one of the most 
important and inexpensive steps you can take is to know the definitions 
of the words you use. On television, several large investment brokerage 
houses have celebrities spouting off words such as P/E ratio, dividend 
reinvestment plan, market capitalization, and other investment jargon. 
These investment houses want you to think that knowing such definitions 
is important to becoming a better investor, and they are. Yet there are 
far more basic and more important definitions that one needs to know 
if you truly plan on retiring rich and retiring young. Some of the more 
basic, fundamental, and important words to understand are your personal 
current ratio , quick ratio , liquidity ratio, debt-to-earnings ratio , as well as 
the difference between assets and liabilities , and the difference between 
ordinary, portfolio , and passive income.
Retire Young Retire Rich163
Harnessing the Power of Words
Why are the latter words more important? The answer is, because 
the words P/E ratio , dividend reinvestment plan , and  market capitalization  
really have no relationship to you, especially when you are just starting 
out in business or investing. Much more fundamental to you and your 
life are basic ratios such as debt-to-equity  or liquidity ratios . Why? Because 
these ratios are useful to you  personally. You can use these definitions in 
real life. If you understand how those ratios apply to you personally and 
if you apply those words to your personal life, then the words become 
a part of your life. The words become flesh. When that happens, you 
harness the power of the words.
P/E ratios apply generally to publicly traded companies, such as 
IBM and Microsoft. A P/E ratio does not apply to you unless you 
personally were up for sale, and I do believe slavery has been abolished 
for a while now. For those who may not know what a P/E ratio is, P/E 
ratio quickly evaluates how expensive or inexpensive a stock is. It is 
similar to a shopper asking what the price per pound of pork butt is. 
There is a difference between pork butt selling for $2.99 a pound and 
pork butt selling for $1.19 a pound. Any wise shopper would know that, 
just because pork butt is cheap, it does not necessarily mean it’s a good 
deal. The same is true for a high or low P/E ratio.
A P/E ratio simply measures the relative price of a stock as compared 
to its earnings. For example, if the stock paid a $2-per-share dividend 
and the stock cost $20 per share, the stock’s P/E ratio would be ten. 
That means it would take you ten years to get your $20 back if all things 
remained the same. Just because a stock has a high or low P/E ratio does 
not mean it is a good buy or a bad buy, just as price per pound does not 
tell you if the pork butt is a good or bad buy. There are other factors you 
would want to check out before simply buying cheap pork butt.
During the dotcom mania, many stocks had high P’s and no E’s, 
which made investing in a dotcom ridiculous, if all you went on was 
price-earnings ratios. When the market crashed, there were a lot of 
people wishing they had bought some cheap pork butt and put it in 
their freezer, instead of buying stocks with high P’s and no E’s. Today, 
Chapter Eleven164
even frozen pork butt is more valuable than the shares of some of the 
dotcom stocks. The real butts were the people who believed you could 
invest in the promise of the future without any reality in today. Many 
young dotcom promoters had the right context, but they failed to have 
the right content—the content called business and investment education 
and experience.
There are more important, basic, and fundamental ratios to 
understand. And if you understand them and use them, your chances  
of becoming richer and financially successful improve. A more useful 
ratio is your debt-to-equity ratio. Why is it more important? Because 
each and every one of us can use this ratio, and we should use this ratio 
each and every month. For example, if you have long- and short-term 
debt of, let’s say, $100,000 and you have $20,000 in equity, then your 
debt-to-equity ratio would look like this:
$100,000
$20,000
So in this case, your debt-to-equity ratio would be a 5. The question 
is: What does this mean? Well, in reality it means very little. Yet if 
next month your ratio is 10, that might tell you that you could be 
mismanaging your life. A debt-to-equity ratio of 10 could mean that 
either your debt has gone up to $200,000, or your equity has dropped 
to $10,000. In either case, those numbers have more meaning because 
they are real numbers that relate to your life. As rich dad said, “Mind 
your own business.” And knowing these simple ratios are excellent tools 
for teaching yourself how to mind as well as manage your own business, 
the business of your life.
Ratios to Apply to Your Life
Just as P/E ratios tend to reflect the confidence the investing 
company has for the management of a public company, you as a 
manager of your own life need to have ratios that apply to your life.  
Retire Young Retire Rich165
The following are some ratios you may want to keep track of if you want 
to be a better manager of your own financial life.
One of the ratios rich dad had me watch and monitor was what he 
called  the wealth ratio . His wealth ratio is:
Passive income + Portfolio income 
T otal expenses
The goal of calculating your wealth ratio is to have your passive and 
portfolio income equal or exceed your total expenses. This would mean 
you could quit your job (ordinary-income source) and still maintain 
your lifestyle. Once your passive and portfolio income exceed your 
expenses, the ratio would be one or higher, and you would be out of the 
Rat Race. This is the goal of playing my CASHFLOW 101  game that 
teaches you how to create passive and portfolio income. An example 
would be:
$600 Passive + $200 Portfolio = 0.2
               $4,000
If rich dad had seen this ratio of 0.2, which means that passive and 
portfolio income equal 20 percent of expenses, he would have had a 
strong talking to me about working harder to increase my passive or 
portfolio income. As rich dad said, “The moment you make passive 
income and portfolio income a part of your life, your life will change. 
Those words will become flesh.” To him, the more I really knew what 
passive and portfolio income was, my life would change because my 
reality of life would change.
Rich dad thought the wealth ratio was a very important ratio to know 
intimately because it was a great indicator on how well you were managing 
the business of your life. He said, “Most people retire poor simply because 
they never know what it feels like to have passive or portfolio income 
actually in their lives. They may know the definition, but they do not have 
the integrity to make the words a real part of their lives.”
Chapter Eleven166
For five years, Kim and I knew what the definitions of the words 
were, and we knew we wanted it in our lives. But for five years we did 
not have those two types of income in our lives. Suddenly after the 1987 
stock-market crash and the seven-year recession that followed, we knew 
that the window of opportunity had arrived. It was our time to make 
the words real. It was time to have a wealth ratio that was more than 
zero. We bought our first property in 1989 and, by 1994, we had a little 
over $10,000 in passive income a month and our total expenses were 
less than $3,000 a month. That gave us a wealth ratio of 3.3. Today, 
our wealth ratio is over 12, even though our expenses have gone up 
significantly. That is the power of making those words a part of your life.
If you are serious about retiring young and retiring rich, you may 
want to make rich dad’s wealth ratio a part of your life. You will find that 
it will be much more meaningful to you than the P/E ratio of IBM or 
Microsoft. If you will look at that ratio on a monthly basis, I think you 
will find your life changing much faster when compared to someone 
who is working for a pay raise. Rich dad’s wealth ratio greatly affected 
what I thought was important for my life.
When I look back upon my life, it was these simple lessons from 
my rich dad that made me the most money over my lifetime. Today, 
my personal debt-to-equity ratio is around 0.7, which means I sleep 
well at night, even though I have a lot of debt. I am by no means debt 
free and never plan to be debt free. The point is, these simple lessons 
from rich dad had a far more powerful impact on my life than all the 
years I spent studying calculus, spherical trigonometry, and chemistry. 
The reason rich dad’s simple lessons had a profound impact was because 
his lessons are relevant to my life for as long as I live. I have never used 
calculus, spherical trigonometry, or a P/E ratio to motivate me to make 
an investment decision. I don’t use them because they are not useful and 
have very little relevance to my personal financial success.
Retire Young Retire Rich167
Add Power to Your Life
There are two points I want to make on words, action, and integrity. 
One point is that a few simple definitions and simple numbers can add 
a lot of power to a person’s life. Just as any good shopper would want to 
know the price per pound of pork butt, each of us should be aware of 
our debt-to-equity ratios, our personal wealth ratio, and other simple 
mathematical indicators, which I will not go into here.
The second point is that there is more to success than simply 
knowing the definitions of words and throwing around jargon in the 
attempt to sound intelligent. Too many people today use words 
they really don’t understand. Many financial-services salespeople 
use financial words that they don’t really understand in an attempt 
to sound more intelligent than their clients. The main point is, if 
you want to retire young and retire rich, it is important for you to 
constantly improve your financial vocabulary. But to fully improve 
your vocabulary, it is also important to know more than just the 
definition of the word. In my opinion, it is important to make that 
word a part of your life and a part of your reality. For example, when 
I say the word  passive income , I say it with passion because it is an 
important part of my life. Passive income means as much to me as  pay 
raise means to many employees. The reason I am not passionate about 
a pay raise is because a pay raise for me would be income without 
much of a future.
I have spent years learning how to convert ordinary income into 
passive income. The more time I spend actually converting ordinary 
income to passive income, the more real-life experience  
I gain. The problem I have with many financial-services salespeople, 
such as stockbrokers, real estate brokers, and financial planners, is 
that while they are selling investment products to you, products that 
hopefully will someday give you passive or portfolio income, they 
themselves are only working for ordinary income. To me, that is being 
somewhat out of integrity.
Chapter Eleven168
How Long Is Your Financial Advisor’s Nose?
Rich dad loved fairy tales. One of his favorite fairy tales was the story 
of Pinocchio, the wooden puppet that wanted to become a real boy. In 
the story, Pinocchio lied and the more he lied, the longer his wooden 
nose grew. It was only after he found his heart and began to tell the truth 
that he turn into a real flesh-and-blood boy. When rich dad would tell 
his son and me that fairy tale, he would say, “That is another example of 
the words becoming flesh... or wood.”
I cringe when I think of the millions of people who are betting their 
financial future and their financial security on a stock market. Millions 
of people are worried about their financial future as the number of 
layoffs increases and the market continues to fluctuate. 
I read an article in the newspaper of how retirees have lost most 
of their retirement savings to investment advisors and insurance 
salespeople they trusted. The newspaper article said the advisors and 
insurance agents began selling these retirees these bogus investments, not 
sanctioned by their brokerage houses or insurance companies, simply 
because the companies they worked for cut back on the commissions 
(ordinary income) they paid their agents. So the agents found new, 
bogus products to sell to people who trusted them, people who were 
hoping for some passive and portfolio income in their old age.
In the coming decades, there will be millions of people who will 
be in financial trouble in their old age simply because they listened to 

Retire Young Retire Rich169
so-called professional people with long wooden noses—people made 
of wood who will continue to say, “The stock market always goes up, 
mutual funds pay an average of 12 percent per year, invest for the long 
term, diversify, and dollar-cost-average your losses.”
The Power of Integrity
While both dads did not stress the importance of the same words, 
they both stressed the importance of the word integrity . Both dads 
agreed that one of the definitions of integrity was “the correlation 
between a person’s  words  and a person’s actions .” Both dads said, “Listen 
to what a person  says but, more importantly, watch what a person does.” 
In other words, if a person says, “I will be there to pick you up at 
7:00 a.m.” and the person picks you up at 7:00 a.m., then he or she is 
100 percent in integrity  at that moment. Their words  and actions  are 
whole. If a person says, “I’ll pick you up at 7:00 a.m.” and that person 
never shows up, never calls, and never apologizes, then, at that moment, 
that person has 0-percent integrity. Their actions and their words do not 
match. Their words and their actions are not whole.
My real dad pointed out to me that one of the dictionary’s 
definitions of the word integrity was the word whole  or complete . He 
constantly said, “You are only as good as your word.” He constantly 
reminded his children about the importance of keeping one’s word.  
He would say, “Ultimately, we are our words. Ultimately, all we have is 
our word. If your words are no good, then neither are you.” That is  
why he also said, “Never make promises you don’t plan to keep.”
T wo young people in Dallas asked me if they could attend my 
investment seminar. They asked for free tickets because they had no 
money. Since they were very convincing, Kim and I agreed to leave two 
free tickets at the gate. They never showed up, and I realized why they 
might have had problems with money, even though they had great jobs.
Chapter Eleven170
A Plan with Integrity
One of the more simple, yet powerful, parts of my plan to have a 
life of great wealth was to make sure I had the integrity to be true to my 
words and respect the power of words by matching my words to my 
actions. Over the years, rich dad made sure I kept my word on my small 
agreements. He said, “If you will keep your small agreements, you will 
keep your big agreements. A person who cannot keep his or her small 
agreements can never have their bigger dreams come true.” 
There are many people who have big plans, but their big plans never 
come true. The reason is that too many people have big plans, but fail to 
keep their small agreements. As rich dad said, “People who do not keep 
their small agreements are people who cannot be trusted. If you cannot 
be trusted with small agreements, people will not help you make your 
big dreams come true. If you cannot keep your word, then people fail to 
trust you and have little confidence in you and your words.”
I have watched the wisdom of both dads’ advice on the power of 
words unfold. I have seen so many people show their core behavior 
when the pressure is on. I have one friend who will not keep his time 
appointments with me, and then he wonders why I don’t want to do 
business with him. He also breaks his agreements with other people 
such as his partners, employees, and bankers, and often legally cheats 
them. Although he is successful, he must always look for new people to 
do business with. Instead of building upon his relationships, he destroys 
them and has to start again with completely new people. He has no 
problem finding new people, but his wooden nose keeps getting longer 
and it’s getting harder to hide.
Another ex-friend of mine is a person who lies under pressure. 
Instead of telling the truth, she lies and thinks she can get away with 
it. When cornered or confronted, she says, “It’s not my fault. I couldn’t 
help it. Besides, I did not lie. You did not understand what I said.” 
As my rich dad said, “People who do not keep their small agreements 
are people who cannot be trusted. If you cannot be trusted with small 
agreements, people will not help you make your big dreams come true.”
Retire Young Retire Rich171
So I pass on the words of wisdom from both my dads and those 
words are, “Be sure your words and your actions are one.” 
In mentioning the fast words and slow words, I assure you that 
part of my plan was to fully understand each of those words mentally, 
emotionally, and physically. Rich dad insisted on that. For example, 
he said, “Your life will change forever once you learn to buy stocks at 
wholesale versus paying retail. When you know how rich you can become 
buying wholesale, you will never want to pay retail again.” He also said, 
“Your life will change forever once you know the difference between 
saving money and making money. Your life will change forever once you 
know why it is better to have depreciation rather than hope and pray for 
appreciation.” Rich dad said, “If you will dedicate your life to making 
words real and a part of your life, your life will be far different than 
someone who only knows the words by their mental definition.”
A significant part of my plan was to make sure the new and faster 
words I learned or became aware of became an active part of my life. 
From my rich dad’s point of view, I would be out of integrity if I simply 
threw those financial words around only to sound intelligent and 
impress other people, and did not actually use them in my life.
So the lesson I pass on to you from my rich dad and my poor dad 
is that when you create your plan, make it a part of your plan to fully 
use and understand the power of the new faster words you want in 
your life. Don’t just know the definition or, even worse, not know the 
definition and sling the words around as jargon, hoping to impress the 
uninformed. Make the words a part of your flesh and you will harness 
the power of the word.
Rich dad often said, “There are preachers and there are teachers. 
Preachers are people who tell you what to do, but they may not do  
what they tell you to do. Teachers are people who tell people about  
what they are doing or what they have already done.” Rich dad also  
said, “In the world of money, business, and investing, we have far too 
many preachers.”
Chapter Eleven172
In Summary
If you want to retire young and retire rich, take the time to 
constantly upgrade your financial vocabulary and have the integrity 
to walk the talk rather than just talk. Always remember that words 
are tools for the brain and that there are fast words and slow words 
to wealth.
The Most Destructive of All Words
Rich dad often said, “The most life-destroying word of all is the 
word tomorrow.” He said, “The poor, the unsuccessful, the unhappy, 
and the unhealthy are the ones who use the word tomorrow the 
most.” These people will often say things like, “I’ll start investing 
tomorrow,” or “I’ll start my diet and exercise tomorrow,” or “I’ll 
start reading tomorrow.” Rich dad said the word tomorrow  is the 
word that destroys more lives than any other single word. He said, 
“The problem with the word  tomorrow  is that I have never seen a 
tomorrow. Tomorrows do not exist. Tomorrows only exist in the 
minds of dreamers and losers. People who put off till tomorrow 
find that the sins and bad habits of their past eventually catch up 
with them.” He finished his comment by saying, “I have never 
seen a tomorrow. All I have are todays. Today  is the word for 
winners. Tomorrow is the word for losers.”
In the coming chapters and lessons, you will learn how to do 
simple things today that can greatly improve your tomorrows.
Chapter Twelve
THE LEVERAGE OF
FAIRY TALES173
Rich dad loved the story of “The Tortoise and the Hare.”  
He once said to me, “I am successful because I have always been 
a tortoise. I did not come from a rich family. I was not smart in 
school. I did not finish school. I am not particularly talented. Yet, 
I am far richer than most people simply because I did not stop. 
I never stopped learning or expanding my reality on what was 
possible for my life.”
Rich dad loved fairy tales and Biblical stories. At the beginning 
of this book, I shared with you the story of David and Goliath.  
Rich dad loved the story that a little guy could beat a giant by using 
the leverage of a slingshot. 

Chapter T welve174
Rich dad loved fairy tales, yet he was not a great reader. He 
absorbed the lessons from those fairy tales, and those lessons guided 
his life, a life where he started with nothing and ultimately became  
a financial powerhouse.
Many times when Kim and I were broke and living on very little,  
I would find a place to sit quietly so I could remember back to rich 
dad telling me the story of the tortoise and the hare. I remember him 
saying, “Many times in life, you will meet people who are smarter, 
faster, richer, more powerful, and more gifted than you. Just because 
they have a headstart on you does not mean you cannot win the race. 
If you will keep the faith in yourself, do the things that most people do 
not want to do, and keep making progress on a daily basis, the race of 
life will be yours.”
Another fairy tale that rich dad loved was the story of “The Three 
Little Pigs.” He would often intertwine the story of the tortoise and 
the hare with the story of the three little pigs. When I was around 
twelve years old, rich dad said, “Poor people build financial houses 
made of straw. The middle class build financial houses made of sticks. 
And rich people build houses of brick.” He would then add, “To be 
a successful tortoise, it’s okay to be slow, but be sure you are slowly 
building a house of bricks.”
In 1968 while at home for Christmas from the academy I attended 
in New York, rich dad and his son invited me to their new home, 
which was the penthouse of his new hotel. “Remember me telling you 

Retire Young Retire Rich175
those stories?” he asked, as we gazed from his balcony over the white 
sand beach and crystal blue ocean. “The stories of the tortoise and the 
hare and the three little pigs?”
“I do,” I said, still amazed at the beauty of their new home, high 
on top of their new hotel. “I remember them well.”
“Well, here is the house of bricks,” he said with a grin.
That day in 1968, rich dad did not have to say much more than 
that. He had told and retold the fairy tales so often that I knew the 
fairy tale had become real. He was the tortoise who took the longer, 
slower, less secure road, but now he was on top and climbing higher. 
He was 49 years old, and he had passed many rabbits along the way.
I also knew that my real dad had built an expensive house of 
sticks in a very affluent neighborhood of Honolulu. My poor dad 
had just been promoted to the head of the school systems for the 
state of Hawaii. He too had reached the top of his ladder. He too had 
become visible to the public, as had rich dad. The difference was that 
one controlled his future, and the other did not. One lived in a house 
made of sticks. The other lived in a skyscraper made of bricks. In three 
years, my dad would lose his safe, secure job and all he would have was 
his house of sticks.
The Value of Being an Ugly Duckling
In 1968 while standing on the balcony of his penthouse, rich dad 
reminded me of another fairy tale. It was a fairy tale that I did not 
realize had meant so much to him because he never recounted it to his 
son and me when we were kids. “Do you know the story of ‘The Ugly 
Duckling’?” he asked.
I nodded my head as I leaned over the balcony.
“Well, most of my life, I saw myself as the ugly duckling.”
“You’re kidding, aren’t you? How could you see yourself as an 
ugly duckling?” I found it hard to believe because rich dad was a very 
handsome man.
Chapter T welve176
“When I dropped out of school at the age of 13, I saw the world 
as an outsider—someone who did not fit, someone who had been left 
behind. While working in my parents’ store, high school boys who 
were on the football team would come in and push me around or 
damage the store. Many a day, these older athletic bullies would come 
in and knock cans off the shelves or throw oranges out on the road and 
dare me to do something about it.”
“Did you ever fight back?” I asked.
“T wice I fought back, but I got pretty badly beaten,” said rich dad. 
“But I’m not just telling you this story to tell you of athletic bullies. In 
this world there are other kinds of bullies.”
Wondering where rich dad was going with this, I just looked down 
from the balcony and listened as he continued.
“I’ve also known people who were intellectual or academic bullies. 
They would come in the store and talk down to me because they were 
better educated. It seemed that, just because they thought they were 
smarter than other people, they could look down upon those of us 
who did not go to school.”
“I have a school filled with those guys,” I added. “It seems that  
just because they think they are smarter than you or had better grades, 
it gives them permission to sneer when they talk to you, or snub  
you altogether.”
Rich dad nodded. Continuing, he said, “While working in the 
store, I also met the social bullies. They looked down their noses 
because they were from rich families, or they were pretty, sexy, 
handsome, popular, and in the “in crowd.” There were many times 

Retire Young Retire Rich177
when these kids would laugh or smirk at me as I waited on them. I 
remember asking one of the girls in the in crowd for a date, and her 
friends laughed at me for even asking. I still remember one of the girls 
saying, ‘Don’t you know that rich girls do not go out with poor boys?’ 
That really hurt.”
“That still goes on,” I said. “I met a girl who said she would not go 
out with me because I didn’t attend an Ivy League school.”
“Well, at least you are in college,” said rich dad. “When the kids  
my age went off to college, I felt alone, left behind, and unwanted.  
And that is why, for all these years, I have seen myself as the  
ugly duckling.”
Rich dad had never shared this part of his life with me before. 
I was now 21 years old, and I realized that his son and I had the 
advantages he did not have. I knew that at times his life had been 
physically hard, but I had no idea how mentally and emotionally 
tough it had been for him.
Standing on the balcony of his prestigious hotel, I began to realize 
that he was not telling me the story of being an ugly duckling for 
me to feel sorry for him. He was smiling and too happy to be doing 
that. So I asked him, “You used the story of the ugly duckling to keep 
you going, didn’t you? You did not use that fairy tale to feel sorry for 
yourself, did you?”
“No,” he agreed. “I used the story of the ugly duckling, the story 
of the three pigs, and the story of the tortoise and the hare to keep 
me going. Instead of letting those few kids who were athletic, social, 
or intellectual bullies get me down, I used their snobbish actions to 
inspire me to do better. Today, I have a house of bricks and we are 
in the penthouse of that house of bricks. If not for those fairy tales, I 
would not be here today. I am no longer the ugly duckling. By taking 
my time to build a house of bricks, using as much leverage as David 
did with Goliath, and taking my time as the tortoise did, I stand here 
on top of the streets I grew up on.”
“You became the swan?” I asked with a smile.
Chapter T welve178
“Well, I wouldn’t go that far,” rich dad chuckled. “The point is that 
we can all grow, evolve, and make dramatic changes in our lives if we 
want to. The other point is that fairy tales can come true. Ugly ducks 
can become beautiful swans, and slow tortoises can win the race.”
Ugly Ducklings into Rich Swans
In my investment seminars, I often put up the following  
exit strategies:
Poor  $25,000 or less per year
Middle class $25,000 to $100,000 per year
Affluent  $100,000 to $1 million per year
Rich  $1 million or more per year
Ultra-rich  $1 million or more a month
I ask the class to not be Pinocchio and instead tell the truth of 
what is real for them if they continue to do the same things they 
are doing. I ask them, “If you keep doing what you are doing today,  
which financial level will you exit at, at age sixty-five?” I also remind 
them that less than one out of 100 exit at or above the affluent level.
Many admit that they would be happy just to exit at the middle-
class level. Their primary concern is that they not exit at the poor level. 
Yet there are a few who ask the question I am looking for, which is, 
“What do I have to do to go beyond the affluent level?” The moment 
someone asks that question, they have the possibility of evolving from 
an ugly duckling and emerging as a financial swan.
At this stage of the investment course, I may retell the fairy tales 
rich dad told me. I ask them, “Can you embrace the lessons from these 
stories and embody them in your life? Can you see the lessons from 
these stories as real and possible for you? Can you imagine going from 
a financially poor duck and emerging as a rich and powerful swan?” 
Some can and others just stare blankly, wondering why I am talking 
about fairy tales in an investment class.
Retire Young Retire Rich179
Then I say, “For me to move from a middle-class mindset and go on 
to the affluent mindset was a change as large as changing from an ugly 
duckling into a swan.”
From Slow Plan to Fast Plan
In one of my classes, a young woman asked, “What is the first step?” 
Before replying, I drew on my flip chart the following picture:
I then said, “In 1989, two years after the market crashed and a 
recession set in, Kim and I were working our plan. It was a slow plan. 
Kim and I had agreed that we would buy two pieces of real estate a year 
for ten years. As the market crashed, we found more and more deals as 
more and more people panicked. In less than a year, we had purchased five 
small rental properties, each with a positive cash flow. I estimate that we 
had looked at over 600 properties just to find those five small houses that 
made investment sense. But now the market was getting worse and more 
and more deals were appearing. The problem was, we were out of money.”
“So you had opportunities, but you were out of money?” the young 
woman asked.
Pointing to the glass on the flip chart, I said, “I realized that we were 
at the limits of our context, our reality.”Content
Context
Chapter T welve180
“So it was time to change your reality?” asked another student.
Nodding, I said, “Yes. It was time to change or miss a window  
of opportunity.”
The class was quiet and listening intently. Knowing that I had their 
attention, I asked, “How many of you have seen an opportunity but 
were unable to take advantage of it?”
Most of the class raised their hands.
“When that happens,” I said, “it means that you are at the 
boundaries of your context —what you think is possible for yourself—
and at the boundaries of your content —the accumulated knowledge by 
which you handle problems and challenges.”
“Then what happens?” asked a student. “What should we do?”
“Most people give up, saying, ‘I can’t do it,’ or ‘I can’t afford it.’ 
Many will ask friends for their opinion, and some friends will tell 
them to play it safe and not to take risks.”
“So what did you do?” asked a student. “What did you do 
when you realized your plan was too slow, there was a window of 
opportunity, and you were out of money?”
“Well, the first thing I did was admit to myself that I was being a 
tortoise who wanted to quit, and it was not time to quit. It was time 
to push on. I also knew that it was time to become more of a swan 
than a duckling. Keeping the lessons from those fairy tales in mind, 
I continued instead of giving up. I knew that I did not know what to 
do, but I knew I had to do something.
“Days of not knowing what to do turned into weeks. One day 
after Kim and I had just come back from a trip, I was putting our 
suitcases down when the phone rang. The phone call was from my 
favorite real estate broker, who said in an excited voice, ‘I just found 
the deal of the day. If you are interested in it, I’ll give you a half-hour 
headstart before I tell another one of my clients.’”
“What kind of deal was it?” asked a student.
“He told me it was a 12-unit apartment house that was in a great 
area and it was only $335,000 with $35,000 down, and the seller 
Retire Young Retire Rich181
was anxious to sell. The broker then faxed me the sales data on the 
property with a rough pro forma on income and expenses.”
“Did you buy it?” asked the student.
“No,” I said. “I told the broker to give me half an hour and  
I would drive out immediately to look at it. When I got there,  
I realized why it was such a great deal so I dashed to a phone and  
told the broker I would take it.”
“Even though you did not have the money?” asked another student.
“We had nothing,” I said. “We had just purchased the last of 
our five units and we were really strapped for cash because we were 
investing in real estate as well as reinvesting in our business. Even 
though we had no money, I offered the sellers what they were asking 
for, which was $35,000 down and they would carry the $300,000  
at 8 percent interest for five years. It was such a great deal that I could 
not pass it up.”
“Why was it such a great deal?” asked another student.
“There were many reasons. One was because the owners lived on 
the property, and they had never raised the rents. The tenants were 
their friends, and they did not have the heart to ask them for more 
money, so the rents were at least 25 percent below market. Another 
reason was that the couple was too old to manage the property, and 
they just wanted to move out. Not being sophisticated investors, they 
did not appreciate the value of their property. They were also afraid 
that the value of their property would fall in value with the recession 
so they were very anxious to sell. Another reason it was a good 
investment was because there was also a new computer-chip factory 
being built just a mile from the property and more than a thousand 
new employees were going to be moving into the area, which again 
meant higher rents. But it was the fact that I did not have to go to a 
bank to borrow the money that really made the deal a good one. So  
I called my broker and I told him that I would give them their full 
price and terms. My only problem was now to find the $35,000 in  
30 days, which was when the couple wanted to move out.”
“So for 30 days you kept asking yourself, ‘How can I afford it?’” 
asked a student.
Chapter T welve182
“Well, for two nights, Kim and I tossed, turned, sweated, and 
worried,” I said. “We were not asking how we could afford it. We kept 
asking ourselves why we were so crazy. I kept asking myself, ‘Why am 
I doing this? We’re doing fine. Our investments are working. Why do 
I have to push the boundaries of my comfort zone?’ I kept thinking 
about the $35,000. I realized that $35,000 was more than many people 
earned pretax in a year, and now I had to come up with $35,000 cash 
in a month. I wanted to quit. My self-confidence was challenged. I felt 
inadequate, stupid, and foolish. After four nights, I finally calmed down, 
and then I began to ask, ‘How could we afford it?’”
“So how did you afford it?” asked a student. “Or did you afford it?”
“Finally, after sweating, praying, and doing our best not to quit,  
we took the paperwork to our bank and presented our story to the 
bank manager. After he turned us down, I asked him why he turned  
us down, and what I could have done better. After he told me,  
I went to the next bank with the first banker’s improvements, and 
was again turned down. After being turned down the second time, 
we again asked the banker why. By the fifth bank, I had learned a 
tremendous amount about what information banks wanted, why 
they wanted it, and how they wanted it presented to them. Even 
though our presentation was much better, we were still turned down 
by the fifth bank. Almost ready to quit, Kim and I went to the sixth 
bank. This time, we were much better prepared. We also knew why 
the investment was a good investment. In trying to convince the five 
bankers, we had convinced ourselves even more of this investment’s 
soundness. This time our presentation was clearer and much more 
professional. We spoke the words bankers wanted to hear. Our 
numbers were clear, and we included our track record with our 
five other properties. We could now explain in banker’s words and 
numbers why it was a great investment. The sixth banker said yes.  
He had the $35,000 check for us in two days. With three days to spare, 
we went to the escrow office and bought the 12-unit apartment house.”
“What happened after that?” asked a student.
Retire Young Retire Rich183
“The real estate market continued to slide, and we kept buying,”  
I replied. “Even though we still had very little money, we kept buying. 
By 1994, the market turned up and we were financially free for the rest 
of our lives. That 12-unit apartment building sold for over $500,000 
in 1994 and had put over $1,100 a month in our pockets during that 
period. The $165,000 in capital gains was rolled tax-deferred into 
a 30-unit apartment house, which is one of the apartment houses 
we still have today. That 30-unit apartment house began putting a 
little bit more than $5,000 a month in our pockets. With the other 
properties and investments we had, we were earning over $10,000 a 
month in passive income, which put us at the affluent level, and we 
retired. We had about $10,000 in passive income and about $3,000 in 
monthly expenses. We were financially free.”
“So it was not luck,” said a student. “Your plan got accelerated.”
“We were prepared for the window of opportunity, and we took 
it,” I said. “Soon after 1994, the prices of real estate skyrocketed, and it 
became a little harder to find such bargains and willing sellers.”
“So you made quite a bit of money without any of your own 
money?” asked a student.
“Yes, on that deal, but I do not recommend you doing what we 
did. Investing in real estate without any money down can be very 
risky if you do not know what you are investing in and if you do not 
have the cash reserves if things do not go the way you expect them to. 
I have met many people who bought a property with nothing down, 
only to find out that the expenses of the property were far greater than 
the actual income they received. I have had friends who have gone 
bankrupt because they purchased property or businesses that were 
too highly leveraged. That is why I do not openly endorse buying 
no-money-down real estate. I recommend having some experience 
buying, selling, and especially managing real estate before going after 
highly leveraged deals. We had looked at hundreds of other properties 
before buying this particular 12-unit property, and we also had the 
cash flow from our business to support any unexpected losses from 
the investment. The trouble with no-money-down real estate deals is 
Chapter T welve184
that there is often too much leverage. That type of highly leveraged 
investment can easily eat you alive if anything should go wrong. So I 
repeat: I do not recommend anyone do what we did. I tell you this story 
for only one reason.”
“And that reason is?” asked another student.
Going to the flip chart, I then added to the drawing I had put up 
there previously: 
“The reason I tell you this story is to explain to you the importance 
of being willing to expand your context as well as add to your context.”
“So today, affording a $335,000 property is easy for you because you 
increased your reality and your education. Is that what you are saying?” 
asked a student.
“Very easy,” I replied. “Looking back upon it now, it seems silly  
to have let a $35,000 down payment seem like a lot of money, and a  
12-unit apartment house seem like a big deal. But back then, it was a lot 
of money, and it was a very big deal. The important thing for Kim and 
me was the willingness to go beyond our context and our content.”
“So most people do not push beyond their comfort levels,” said 
another student. “Most people find it easier to play it safe and say,  
‘I can’t afford it.’”
“That has been my experience,” I said. “I believe that one of 
the main reasons why less than 1 percent of the population goes Content
Context
$335,000
Property
Retire Young Retire Rich185
beyond the affluent level is simply because most people find it very 
uncomfortable going beyond their personal reality, their context, and 
their content. Most people try and solve their financial problems with 
what they know, rather than expand what they know so they can solve 
a bigger problem. Rather than taking on bigger financial challenges, 
most people wrestle all their lives with financial problems they feel 
comfortable with. They remain poor but pretty swans, rather than risk 
becoming an ugly duckling again.”
“Have you become an ugly duckling again?” asked a student a  
little cynically.
“Sure,” I said. “After the $335,000 apartment house, we found it 
easy to invest up to the $2.5 million level. From 1994 to 2001, we did 
well in that range up to $2.5 million and our passive income increased 
to about $16,000 a month without much effort. We were definitely  
at the affluent level, and it was time to move on to be rich. For those 
of you who know our past, you may recall that Rich Dad Poor Dad   
was written between 1995 and 1996 in rough draft. I designed and 
created the CASHFLOW  board game in 1996, and I got back into  
the world of business. Simultaneously in 1996, I knew it was time  
for me to learn how to take a company public through the IPO 
process, which is when I met Frank, as described in book number 
three, Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing . Also in 1996, Rich Dad Poor 
Dad was published. We founded CASHFLOW® Technologies, Inc. in 
the fall of 1997. We were entering a new world with a new context, 
content, and friends. Our real estate investing context remained at 
$2.5 million in investments.”
“So you moved to expand your context in other areas, but did not 
expand your real estate reality. Is that what you are saying?” asked a student.
“That is exactly what I am saying,” I said. “Our little company 
grew far beyond our wildest dreams. After working for five years with 
Frank, we had four to six companies ready to go public through the 
IPO process. Both in business and in the IPO process, our reality on 
what is possible has expanded considerably. Our context in business 
and the IPO process has taken quantum leaps.”
Chapter T welve186
“But your reality in real estate remained the same,” said a student. 
“It has remained the same since the $335,000, 12-unit apartment 
house. It has remained stuck between $335,000 and $2.5 million. 
That is your lesson, isn’t it?”
“Exactly,” I said. “Just because a person improves in one financial 
arena does not mean they expand in all arenas. That is why in 2001, 
Kim and I decided it was time to get back to real estate and push the 
walls of our context again.”
Getting Rich Gets Easier
Years ago, rich dad said to me, “One of the reasons the rich get 
richer is because, once you’ve found the formula to getting rich, it gets 
easier to get rich. If you never find the formula, getting rich always 
seems hard and staying poor seems natural.”
The reason I have spent so much time on this subject of reality, 
context, and content is because it was rich dad’s formula. It was his 
basic formula to never say, “I can’t afford it,” or “I can’t do it.” He  
chose instead to expand his reality. As you already know, rich dad 
used fairy tales and Biblical stories as his life-guiding lessons to keep 
him going through times of doubt and fear. But it was his lesson on 
acceleration of wealth that was most interesting to me. He would say, 
“Once you know that the formula to getting rich is to continually 
expand your reality which increases your leverage, then getting rich 
becomes easier and easier. For people who become stuck in one reality 
and think their reality is the only reality, the speed at which they can 
become rich goes down.”
In other words, rich dad taught me that once you become rich, 
getting richer is easier and becomes faster. If you never become rich, 
life becomes harder and slower. Knowing this, I knew it was time 
for Kim and me to expand our reality on real estate again. We had 
invested over five years expanding our reality on business and the IPO 
process, and we had become rich much quicker and faster than ever 
before. I knew that at the next level, getting richer would become 
easier and faster. I knew because I saw it happen to my rich dad.
Retire Young Retire Rich187
After $5 Million, It Gets Very Easy
Late in the year 2000, the stock market was crashing, our business 
was expanding rapidly, our books and games were selling worldwide, 
and the companies we were bringing public were taking shape nicely 
and were soon to be profitable. Kim said to me, “I want to get back 
into real estate. We need to invest in more stable assets if we want to 
maintain our wealth.” With that, we went back out into the market 
and ran into our old reality, our old context and content. It felt like 
we were back again, trying to find $35,000 for a $335,000 apartment 
house. Even though we could easily write a check for three $335,000 
apartment houses, paying cash without needing a loan, we were having 
trouble again. Things were not coming our way. At that point, I knew 
it was time to expand our reality one more time.
Up until then, Kim and I were looking for projects that ran 
around $4 million. We felt comfortable with that number  since we 
knew we had over $1 million for the down payment if we needed it. 
We thought we knew a lot, but we could not find a property or the 
financing that made sense or that worked according to our new plan. 
Then I called an old friend named Bill, who does hundreds of millions 
of dollars in real estate. After finally tracking him down, I asked him 
what was wrong with our approach. Bill’s reply was, “Four million 
dollars is a tough market. Banks don’t like investments that big, and 
projects of that size are not exciting enough for sophisticated private 
investors. But after $5 million, it gets easy again.”
The moment he said that, I knew I was at the boundary of my 
reality, my context. Four million dollars was easy and comfortable, but 
$5 million was now just outside my comfort zone. My mind began to 
scream, saying, “If I can’t get a bank interested in a $4 million project, 
how will I get them interested in a $5 million project?” I could hear 
my reality speaking loudly to me. I could also hear rich dad telling me 
to remember the fairy tales and to also remember that getting rich gets 
easier the richer you get, if you just follow the formula. I knew it was 
time to follow the formula and push beyond my reality.
Chapter T welve188
It Got Very Easy
At the start of this book, I wrote about how easy it was to retire 
early by borrowing money from the banks. Once Kim and I were 
willing to push beyond our reality, our comfort zone, we found out 
that it is just as easy to borrow money from the government.
I have written about the tax laws being in favor of those who are  
in the B and I quadrants and against those in the E and S quadrants.  
I also wrote that most of the people who complain about taxes are  
E’s and S’s. That’s because the government wants to be the partner of 
the B’s and I’s since they create jobs and provide housing. I had always 
known this, because my rich dad had told me, but I had no idea  
how much the government helps those that help the government  
until I began looking into real estate investments over $5 million,  
until I was willing to expand my context.
Our search was on. We were now looking for larger projects that 
were far beyond our comfort zone. At our first meeting in 2001 with 
a real estate sales person who specializes in low-income government-
sponsored housing, Kim and I showed the salesperson our existing 
real estate portfolio. In our portfolio we had millions of dollars in real 
estate, mainly in unit sizes of 30 to 50 apartments.
“You know how to manage multifamily apartment houses,” said 
the real estate agent, a young woman in her late thirties. “That’s good.”
“Why is that good?” asked Kim.
“Because one of the government’s requirements is that anyone 
it lends money to must have a successful track record at managing 
multifamily apartment houses. You’ve been doing that for over 
ten years and have run them profitably. Many people want these 
government loans, but very few people qualify for them,” said the 
agent. “As you know, most people who do own a few investment 
properties want to manage their own real estate, collect their rents, 
and do their own repairs. That is why they never learn how to manage 
larger properties as you do.”
Kim and I nodded. We knew there was much more to real estate 
than simply collecting rent and fixing a few toilets. We had learned a 
lot in the last ten years. But now it was time for us to move on. If we 
Retire Young Retire Rich189
were to move on, we had to meet new people, learn a new vocabulary, 
and be willing to play a much bigger game. Listening to these two 
new people in our lives, I realized that over the past ten years we had 
become hares and swans in the real estate market up to $4 million. We 
were the proverbial big fish in a small pond. It was now time to move 
on and again become uncomfortable, become slow tortoises and ugly 
little ducklings in a much bigger game.
Sitting next to the agent was an investment banker who specialized 
in tax-exempt, rated and nonrated government housing bonds. When 
I asked him what kind of financing programs the government had, he 
replied, “If you and your project qualify, the government will offer you 
95-percent to 110-percent financing.”
“You mean they will lend us all of the money to buy our next 
investment? The government will give us the money to buy our asset?”
“Even more if you qualify,” he said. “The government will even 
lend you the money to fix up or rehabilitate the project if you qualify.”
“You mean if the project costs $10 million, they will lend us all of 
the $10 million or more? And if it takes $3 million to fix the place up, 
they will also lend us that money? They will lend us all the money for 
our property?”
The investment banker nodded. “They would prefer to lend you 
$20 million or more, but $10 million would be a good place for you 
to start. Once you do a $10 million project, a $20 million or even 
a $50 million project would not be out of line, if you have a proven 
track record.”
I could hear rich dad saying that things got easier and easier, but  
I could not believe it could become this easy. Still in a little disbelief,  
I asked, “At what kind of terms?”
“I might be able to secure interest rates between 5 percent to 7 
percent, fixed for 40 years, and nonrecourse.”
“Nonrecourse?” I gasped. “You mean the government won’t come 
after everything I own personally if the project goes bad and I can’t 
pay the money back? My banker hates nonrecourse loans. Every time 
I borrow money from him, he makes sure everything I own is also on 
the line.”
Chapter T welve190
“That’s correct,” said the investment banker. “But you realize that 
there are many terms and conditions that apply here that do not apply 
to conventional bank financing.”
“I realize that,” I said. “But I had no idea how good the 
government could be.”
“Occasionally, there are even better programs in these tax-exempt 
government bond issues. There are occasionally forgivable loans, where 
the government simply forgets you borrowed money from them if you 
do certain things well. It is very similar to a grant.”
“Why does the government do this?” I asked.
“Because one of the great problems facing this country is low-
income affordable housing. The government is afraid that without 
people like you, millions and millions of people will go homeless and 
be forced to live in substandard, crime-ridden slums. The government 
is going after slumlords and is taking some of them to jail. These 
slumlords prey on the poor, and the government wants to put a stop 
to them. At the same time, the government is willing to offer billions 
of dollars to individuals like you who have proven themselves to be 
responsible managers of large multifamily projects.”
“They are willing to give me the money to become even richer.”
“That is correct,” said the investment banker as the real estate 
broker smiled on. “It’s more than just money. It’s big money. If you do 
well over the next few years, I can help you borrow billions of dollars 
if you want to get that big and that rich. Last year, one of our divisions 
had to return over a billion dollars because they could not find anyone 
who qualified for it.”
It was Kim who said, “The best thing about getting rich this way 
is that we do a lot of good for a lot of people. It excites me to think 
about turning a slum into safe housing for people with families.”
“That is exactly what the government wants you to do. Most of 
our problems come from our slums. It is from our slums where crime 
breeds and grows. If you can change slums into safe housing, you will 
have more and more money available to you. As much as you want.”
“So we become rich by becoming partners with the government?”
Retire Young Retire Rich191
“As rich as you want to be,” smiled the investment banker. “All you 
have to do is do what you have been doing for the past ten years, which 
is own and manage multifamily apartment houses. All you have to do 
is capitalize on your ten years of experience. And we would love to help 
you get even richer. Do you know how hard it is to find people with 
your years of experience? Just let us know when you’re ready. She’ll help 
you find your property, and I’ll find you all the money you want.”
The meeting was soon over. Kim and I thanked them and headed for 
our car. Once in the car, we sat quietly in almost stunned disbelief. It took 
a number of miles before we said anything. Finally Kim said, “Do you 
remember the 12-unit apartment house we bought ten years ago?”
“I was just thinking about it,” I replied.
“What would have happened if we had chosen to say, ‘I can’t afford 
it’?” she asked. “What would our lives be like if we had let $35,000 
stop us?”
I thought for a moment and said, “I think we would still be saying the 
same thing today. If $35,000 had stopped us back then, it would probably 
be stopping us today.” As we drove out of the parking lot, I could hear 
rich dad saying, “Your future is determined by what you do today, not 
tomorrow.” T urning to Kim I said, “If we had said ‘I can’t afford it’ ten 
years ago, we would probably be saying ‘I can’t afford it’ today.”
We drove home in silence, feeling excited and blessed. I could hear 
rich dad telling me that once you become rich, getting rich becomes easier 
and easier. I could hear him saying to me that the reason many people 
never go past the middle-class level of life is because they do not believe 
in fairy tales. Since they do not believe in fairy tales, they fail to learn the 
lessons from the stories. As I got out of the car, I silently thanked my rich 
dad and could hear him saying to me, “Always remember that fairy tales 
do come true, in one way or another.”

Chapter Thirteen
THE LEVERAGE OF 
GENEROSITY193
Who Is Really Greedy?
The other night, one of the news commentators said in a heated 
tone, “I did not go into business because I am not a greedy person.”
For much of my childhood, I heard comments like that one. 
Many of the people who visited my parents’ home were people who 
either worked for the university, the educational system, the labor 
union, the Peace Corps, or for the government. Although not stated 
as blatantly as the TV commentator, it was often said or implied that 
people in business were in business simply because they were greedy.
My rich dad had a different point of view. He often said, “All of 
us are greedy to some extent. It’s only natural to desire basic survival, a 
better life, and enough life support to live well once we stop working. 
But just because someone is in business or is rich does not necessarily 
mean they are greedier than anyone else. In fact, it could be just 
the opposite.” He then said, “The reason most people are not rich is 
simply because they are not generous enough.”
In the previous chapter, when Kim and I decided to increase our 
real estate holdings, the floodgate of money from the government also 
opened up.
In our desire to become richer, one of the first steps was to find 
ways of being more generous, in this case, to provide better housing 
for more people at a better price.
Chapter Thirteen194
When you look at history, the richest people have been very 
generous in one way or another. Henry Ford became a billionaire by 
providing affordable cars for the masses at a time when cars were only 
for the rich. In fact, many of the car companies that only built cars 
for the rich are no longer in business today. The car companies for the 
rich went out of business, while the Ford Motor Company grew into a 
worldwide industrial power, fulfilling Henry Ford’s mission. So if you 
want to retire young and retire rich, it’s okay to be greedy, just as long as 
you constantly work to find ways to give more to more and more people. 
If you will do that, you will find your own path to great wealth.
Ratios of the Rich
Rich dad liked ratios because, as he said, “You can tell a lot just by 
a little comparison.” To rich dad, ratios were simply comparisons, just 
as a P/E ratio is simply a comparison. When it came to money, rich 
dad said, “One of the main reasons the poor and middle class struggle 
is because their ratios have no leverage.” He would use the ratio 1:1 to 
illustrate the leverage ratio of a poor or middle-class person.
One day, while I was still in college, rich dad showed me his ratios. 
On a paper, he wrote:
Businesses  1:5
Workers  1:300
Real estate  1:450
Dollars  1:6 million
Shares  1:2 million
In other words, his business ratio meant he owned interests in five 
businesses. He had over 300 workers working for him. In real estate, 
he had over 450 tenants, and that did not include his industrial real 
estate, stores, or restaurants. As the years went on, the numbers on the 
right side of the ratio continually increased, which is why he got richer 
and richer, while working less and less.
 My poor dad’s ratio started out at 1:1 and ended with 1:1, which 
is why he got poorer and poorer. As you can tell by the leverage ratio, 
Retire Young Retire Rich195
my poor dad believed in “a day’s pay for a day’s work.” There were 
times my poor dad worked at two different jobs. Even though he 
worked two jobs, his ratio remained at 1:1 according to my rich dad’s 
definition. Rich dad said, “If most people have two jobs, they are just 
working more hours at the same ratio.”
Between 1985 and 1990, the ratios for Kim and me looked like this:
Businesses  1:1
Real estate  1:0
Dollars   l: not much
We had one business we were building, we owned a home but we 
did not count it as an asset since it took money from us every month, 
and we had almost nothing in savings. Stocks or other paper assets 
were inconsequential, since they cost us money and never put any 
money in our pockets.
By 1995, our leverage ratios looked like this:
Businesses  1:0
Real estate  1:70
Dollars  1:300,000
By this date, we had sold our business, bought more income-
producing real estate, and put some money in the bank. The important 
thing was that the real estate provided us enough money to live at the 
affluent level and never work again.
By 2000, our leverage ratios looked like this:
Businesses  1:7
Real estate  1:70
Dollars  1: millions
Shares  1:1.5 million
While the ratios paint an interesting picture of financial progress, 
the real gains are in the business arena, the arena where the true dollar 
valuations, or cash flows, are not reflected in the ratios. I do not 
present these numbers to impress, for they are not that impressive, nor 
Chapter Thirteen196
do I present them to brag. In fact, I hesitate to show these numbers 
because they are personal, and I would rather not show them. I show 
them simply to illustrate our path and our plan. I also present them 
to let people know it is possible to start with very little and yet build a 
financial house of bricks, as in the story of the three little pigs.
Even though the numbers are not big when compared to the world 
of the ultra-rich, our plan is to continue the acceleration of wealth for 
a few more years. If things go according to plan, we should move into 
the world of the ultra-rich.
You may notice from the numbers that our plan over the past few 
years was to move into building businesses rather than acquiring real 
estate. For the next five to ten years, our plan is to continue to build 
more businesses, but focus more on acquiring larger pieces of real 
estate with the help of government funding.
The point I would like to impress upon you now is the idea of 
the continual expansion of context, or reality, and the constant search 
for faster and better content, or education. If you want to follow 
a similar path to wealth, I cannot stress enough the importance of 
having an open mind, going beyond personal doubts, limitations, and 
complacency, being willing to learn, and taking action. I have met 
many people who want to grow financially at this rate, or faster, but 
many are not willing to expand their context or increase their content. 
So these are the people who struggle at one thing or go from project 
to project, hoping it is the project that will make them rich. I contend 
that if a person has an ever-increasing context and content, the person 
will become richer and richer, regardless of what the project is. It is 
not the product or new idea that will make you rich. It is your context 
and content that make you rich. Ray Kroc of McDonald’s became a 
billionaire by selling billions of average hamburgers, and Starbucks 
became a world-famous brand by selling cups of coffee.
Rich dad often said, “If you do not change your context or your 
content, your ratios will remain the same.” I have a friend who always 
has the next new idea to make millions of dollars. The other day, he 
called me and asked me to invest in his latest scheme. He had a great 
idea for a line of clothing that the store he works part-time for does 
Retire Young Retire Rich197
not sell. He said, “Every day people come in to this store looking for 
this brand of clothing. My boss does not want to carry it. Why don’t 
you give me some money and I’ll open a shop right across from this 
one? We’ll split the profits 50-50.”
When I asked this friend if he would attend classes on cash-flow 
management, retail management, sales, marketing, and hiring and firing 
people, he declined. His response was, “Why do I need to do that? I’ve 
worked in this store for years. I don’t need to learn anything more to run 
a store.” After I turned him down, he called again with another project, 
and again I turned him down.
I turned him down simply because I doubt if he is willing to change 
his context and content. He just wants to make money. Given his age, 
if he were good with money, he would already be rich. He continues to 
think that it is the next hot idea or business opportunity that will make 
him rich, rather than his limited context and content that holds him 
back. Even if he did open that store and his new products were successful, 
I suspect that his ratio would continue to be 1:1. In other words, he 
would probably have to be in the store all day and all night with very 
little chance of expansion, given his existing context and content.
Why It’s Hard to Get Rich
It’s hard or nearly impossible to get rich with a context and content 
that limits you to a 1:1 leverage ratio. It’s hard to get rich because there 
is no leverage. When you look at the CASHFLOW Quadrant, you 
may begin to understand why it is harder for the E and S quadrants to 
get rich because of the leverage ratios. 
Chapter Thirteen198
For the most part, the E and S side is all 1:1 ratio, with few 
exceptions. For example, most employees can only work for one 
company at a time. While they may hold a second job, that still falls in 
the 1:1 ratio. The same is true for many small business owners or self-
employed people. That friend of mine who wanted to open a clothing 
store would most likely have been chained to one store. I sincerely 
doubt if he could handle more than one store. A dentist can only drill 
in one mouth at one time, and a lawyer or accountant only has so 
many billable hours in a day.
My tax advisor said, “A vast majority of high-income professional 
people from the S quadrant get stuck at an income cap of $100,000 
to $150,000. The ones who make more do so because they are highly 
specialized and charge a lot more per hour or by the project. This 
group caps out at around $500,000 per year. Very few make much 
more than that.” Again, the problem is the 1:1 leverage ratio.
One of the fairy tales mentioned in the previous chapter was 
the story of the tortoise and the hare. One of the ways the hares, or 
rabbits, of life get off to a fast start is because they have some special 
gift, intelligence, or talent. They may be great scholars, fast learners, 
great athletes, or artists such as movie stars. Many do well early in life. 
Yet for a tortoise like me, I knew that the way I would win my own 
race was to win the race using the ratios of leverage. It was the same 
plan my rich dad used. Maybe if I had been really smart and became 
a rocket scientist, maybe I could have been successful in the more 
traditional world of business and climbed the corporate ladder. But 
early in life when I began having trouble in school, I knew that I had 
to find my own way of winning my race. Today my income is greater 
than many of my peers who got the high-paying jobs early in life. My 
income is higher because I use the leverage of  assets  rather than the 
leverage of my labor .
For those of you who want to retire young and retire rich, one of 
the decisions that you may need to make is to find out which race you 
have the best chance of winning. For example, if you are like baseball 
star Alex Rodriguez who was paid $252 million for a ten-year contract 
Retire Young Retire Rich199
plus commercial endorsements, then obviously the E quadrant is the 
best for you. Even though Rodriguez’s ratio is 1:1 for ten years, it is 
a pretty good ratio when the dollar signs are added in. If you can be 
a movie star like Julia Roberts who makes $20 million a movie, then 
that is obviously the best path for you. Secretary of the T reasury under 
George W. Bush, Paul O’Neill, received over $100 million in shares 
and stock options as an employee of Alcoa. Even though he was in a 
work situation with a 1:1 ratio, his compensation was very leveraged. 
If you think that your chances for success are best on the path to 
the top of the corporate ladder of a major corporation, then that is 
the best path for you, even if it is a 1:1 ratio. The reason Kim and I 
followed the same path rich dad used was simply because we felt we 
had the best chance for financial success on his path. It was a path that 
required us to acquire assets. It was a path that required us to work at 
constantly increasing our leverage ratios.
A Good Path for Turtles
There is another reason why I personally chose rich dad’s path.  
The reason is found in the CASHFLOW Quadrant.
 
 
Limited    Infinite
Chapter Thirteen200
Years ago rich dad pointed to the left side and said, “The earnings 
potential in the E and S quadrants is limited. The earnings potential in 
the B and I quadrants is infinite.”
Rich dad explained further, saying, “The trouble with selling your 
labor for money is that there is only so much you can do. If you learn 
to acquire or build assets to generate money, you can slowly but surely 
increase your income. In fact, the right side of the Quadrant is a great 
side for turtles who slowly but surely acquire more and more assets.”
Rich dad also said, “The trouble with selling your labor is that your 
labor has no long-term residual value. If you buy a rental property and 
you profitably rent it out, the labor you used to acquire that rental 
property can be rewarded over and over again, for years. In other 
words, you can be paid for years for something that may have taken 
less than a week of work to do.” An example is in 1991 when Kim 
and I bought a property in a resort area for $50,000 cash. It was a 
great deal, since it originally sold for $134,000. We bought it out of 
foreclosure from a bank. Since 1991, we have been paid over $1,000 a 
month net income or over $12,000 a year for years. The total time it 
took to buy and put the property in a rental pool was less than eight 
hours of work. We have thought of selling the property and taking the 
appreciation, but that would be too much trouble at this time.
The trouble with working at a job for money is that you have 
to start over, selling your labor each and every morning. In most 
cases, your labor has no long-term residual value if you are working 
for money. On top of that, if you are working for money, then your 
earning potential is limited. But if you work slowly acquiring assets, 
your income potential is infinite and that income can be passed on for 
generations to come. You can’t pass your job or profession on to your 
children in your will.
Life Gets Easier
Rich dad pointed out that working for money by selling your labor 
often means that life gets harder simply because you have to work 
harder to make more money. He said, “If your leverage ratio for life 
remains at 1:1, then your life will get harder. If you work for an ever-
Retire Young Retire Rich201
increasing leverage ratio, then life gets easier and you make more and 
more money.”
 
A Quantum Leap in Wealth
Most of us have heard of the term a quantum leap . Others may 
use the term exponential, which means “beyond a linear increase in 
something.” In other words, 1+1 does not equal 2. In a quantum leap 
of wealth or an exponential increase of money, 1+1 can equal 5, 6, 
7, or more. In other words, if you work diligently and build a strong 
house of bricks, I have found that there are often sudden quantum 
leaps of wealth, quantum leaps that people who follow a 1:1 do not 
seem to have.
For example, from 1985 to 1990, life for Kim and me was pretty 
much a life of financial struggle. Suddenly, between 1990 and 1994, 
Kim and I had a sudden and exponential burst in wealth and financial 
success. From 1994 to 1998, life again was pretty stable. We worked 
diligently building assets—more specifically, businesses. We did not 
buy much in the way of real estate, since the price of property had 
gotten too high and finding a great deal took too much time. Then 
suddenly in 1999, not only did my books and games begin to take off, 
but many of our other businesses and investments began to catch fire.
It seemed like a sudden surge of good fortune, new friends, and new 
opportunities. Yet in reality, it was the years of working without many 
results and occasional financial setbacks that were the source of the surge 
in exponential wealth. The reason this happens is because the value of 
assets often increases exponentially while the value of your labor only 
increases incrementally. For example, my accountant told me that the 
value of one of my companies grew to $40 million in the year 2000. 
That was the price she thought we could sell it for if we wanted to. At 
the same time, one of my attorneys raised his hourly rate by $25 an 
hour. That is an example of assets increasing exponentially,  and income 
increasing incrementally . That is another example of the earning potential 
of the left side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant being limited, and the 
earning potential of the right side being almost infinite.
Chapter Thirteen202
Another example of a quantum leap occurred in the number of 
shares of companies we owned. From 1996 to 1998, we worked at 
acquiring shares of a public company. That company suddenly went 
broke, and we lost everything we had in that company. Our shares 
became virtually worthless. Yet, due to the experience we gained 
working on acquiring a major stake in that company, we transferred 
what we had learned to acquiring shares in better companies at very 
low prices. Hence we have gone on to acquire many shares in good 
start-up companies and those shares have gone on to do very well, even 
in a down stock market.
At the start of this book, I wrote about the journalist who 
criticized me, saying that most new companies fail at the start. 
Today, even though the risks are still high in starting a business, the 
experience gained from running those small struggling companies that 
failed has added to my ability to start companies that are more stable 
and have a better long-term chance of success. When I look at the 
success of Rich Dad Poor Dad  and our company, much of our current 
success is due largely in part to my failures of the past. Kim also had 
her setbacks, and yet those setbacks became the lessons learned that 
contributed to our combined success today. It is what we learned from 
our individual pasts that gives us what seems to be the sudden and 
quantum leap of success we enjoy today.
I mention all this as a way of encouraging you to keep going, even 
though you may encounter some setbacks along your life’s path. If you 
will learn from each setback rather than blame or make excuses, your 
wealth of knowledge will increase. If you steadily work to be more and 
more generous, work to serve more and more people, work to increase 
your leverage ratios, I am quite certain that you too will experience 
these sudden bursts, quantum leaps, or exponential jumps in wealth. It 
seems that even turtles can push along with a sudden gust of tailwind.
The Power of Networks
I came across a law known as Metcalfe’s Law that partially explains 
the quantum leap or exponential burst of wealth. Robert Metcalfe is 
one of the founders of 3Com, the company that produced the Palm 
Retire Young Retire Rich203
Pilot. His law states: The economic power of a business is the square of the 
number in the network .
The story of the fax machine helps us understand this concept 
more clearly. In my early days at the Xerox Corporation, we were 
tasked at selling fax machines. The problem in the early 1970s was 
that very few people had fax machines, and even fewer people knew 
what they did. Since there were so few fax machines, their economic 
value was low. Yet as time went on and more and more people used 
them, there was a sudden burst in their popularity. Today, most of my 
friends have fax machines in their homes as well as their business.  
So Metcalfe’s Law is this: If you have only one fax machine, your 
economic value is one, according to the formula,
1:12 = Economic value of 1
The economic value of 1 squared is still 1. But the moment you 
have two fax machines, the economic value of the network does not go 
up linearly. It increases quantumly. The moment you have a second fax 
machine, the economic value goes up to 4, not two.
1:22 = Economic value of 4
When there are 10 fax machines in the network, the numbers look 
like this:
1:102 = Economic value of 100
Chapter Thirteen204
The S Quadrant Suffers
For people who operate as sole proprietors or other forms of 
self-employed small business owners, they often do not have the 
benefit of Metcalfe’s Law. One of the reasons a franchise group such as 
McDonald’s is more powerful than a mom-and-pop hamburger stand 
is again due to Metcalfe’s Law.
I have found that people who work hard at being rugged 
individuals often have to work much harder just to maintain their 
autonomy. That is why many professionals join associations in order to 
have more clout in the world.
The E Quadrant Unionizes
For years, people in the E quadrant have known the value of 
getting organized into labor unions. By joining together, employees 
in the E quadrant have much more power than trying to negotiate as 
individuals. Today, one of the richest and most powerful labor unions 
in America is the NEA, the National Education Association. One of 
the reasons our educational system is slow to change is largely due to 
the power of the teachers union. They know the power of a network.
 
The Power of Monopoly ®
Rich dad often said, “The formula for great wealth is found in the 
game of Monopoly .” Many of us know this formula: Buy four green 
houses and trade them in for one red hotel. The formula for wealth 
found in the game of  also follows Metcalfe’s Law. When you look 
at the comparison of my poor dad’s and rich dad’s ratio, you may 
understand why my rich dad’s economic power continued to increase, 
and my poor dad’s economic power remained the same.
     Poor Dad Rich Dad
Real estate   1:1 never changed 1:450 always increasing
Retire Young Retire Rich205
In other words, my poor dad’s economic power remained at 1. 
One squared is still 1. All he had was his house. In this example, my 
rich dad’s economic power was 4502. He controlled over 450 rental 
units. His economic power was going up exponentially. When you 
look at my poor dad’s ratio of 1:1 and then factor in the effect that 
taxes had on his income, ordinary income at 50 percent, you can 
actually see why my poor dad’s economic power did not increase 
although he worked harder and harder. My rich dad’s income was 
going up, his economic power was going up, and he was paying less 
and less in taxes.
In 1985, Kim and I had a plan to acquire two new rental units a 
year. We began buying our first property in 1989. Once we had five 
units, our economic power was 52 or 25. Not only did our economic 
power go up, our confidence had also gone up as our experience went 
up. When we purchased that 12-unit apartment house, our leverage 
ratio was 1:17 and our economic power was 1:172 or 289. Others 
who only had their home and did not purchase investment property 
during the downturn, had their real estate ratio remain 1:1 and their 
economic power remain at 1. Kim and I now have over a thousand 
rental units in our portfolio. The question is: What is the economic 
power of 1,0002?
This example explains how a person who operates in the B or 
I quadrant can soon pass a very smart, talented, or well-educated 
person in the E or S quadrant, even though the person in the E or S 
quadrant earns more money. Metcalfe’s Law explains why my rich dad 
was eventually earning more in a year than my poor dad earned all his 
life. Metcalfe’s Law also explains why tortoises can beat hares if they 
continue to acquire assets rather than work for money as many a rabbit 
often does. 
Network-Marketing Business
After understanding Metcalfe’s Law, the law of networks, I knew 
why network-marketing organizations offer such a powerful tool 
to average people like you and me. Applying Metcalfe’s Law to a 
Chapter Thirteen206
network-marketing business, you begin to see the power of this form 
of business.
For example, a person from the E or S quadrant decides to join a 
network-marketing organization and learns to move to the B quadrant. 
They work for a year or two, gaining the required education and 
mindset. Nothing much happens for, let’s say, two years. People come 
and people go from their business rather than stick it out. After a year 
or two, their leverage ratio or economic power is the same. It is not 
much different from being in the E or S quadrant.
   1:12 
   Economic power of 1
In the third year, this person’s context is expanded with new 
content. All of a sudden, they now attract and train three strong 
candidates who also want to build the business.
Their leverage ratio and economic power looks like this:
   1:32 
   Economic power of 9
In three years that is a quantum leap of power. After five years,  
this person now has a network of ten, and their leverage ratio looks 
like this:
   1:102 
   Economic power of 100
And now let’s say this person decides that ten people are enough, 
and he or she focuses only on the ten people in their business. After 
just a few years, let’s say the ten people in the network also have ten 
people (1:10:10). That means the original person now has 100 people 
in their network.
Retire Young Retire Rich207
Then with some excess cash, this person begins to buy apartment 
houses. He begins with a 100-unit apartment house:
   Business 1:10:10
   Real estate 1:100
Within five to ten years, this individual has not only made the shift 
from the E and S quadrants, he has jumped his economic power in 
both the B and I quadrants, something that is hard to do in the E and 
S quadrants. Suddenly, the person who made the shift is far wealthier, 
making much more money, and has more economic power than the 
peers he or she left behind in the E or S quadrant.
After fifteen years, the numbers could be staggering.
That is an oversimplified example of why I recommend some of 
the network-marketing companies. As the name says, it is a  network , 
which harnesses Metcalfe’s Law, which is the law that measures the 
power of networks.
Today, when I talk to people who are worried about their 
retirement or their funds in their retirement account, I often 
recommend they add to their portfolio a network-marketing business. 
I say to them, “If you really follow the lessons taught by some of the 
network-marketing businesses and you build a solid business with 
solid people in your network, you will find that business to be far more 
secure than the mutual funds found in your retirement account. If 
you truly work hard to make those in your network rich, they in turn 
will make you rich and very secure. In my mind, a network-marketing 
business is far more secure than the stock market because you are 
counting on people you have grown to love and trust, and all of you 
are harnessing the power of Metcalfe’s Law, the law that measures the 
power of networks.”
Chapter Thirteen208
Networks Harness the Power of Generosity
The rich and powerful understand the power of networks. 
McDonald’s is a network of hamburger stands linked throughout the 
world. General Motors is a network of car dealerships throughout 
America. Exxon is an oil company with oil fields, tankers, pipelines, 
and gas stations linked throughout the world. If the rich and powerful 
use networks, shouldn’t you? Safeway is a chain of food stores that 
distributes food throughout the country. CBS, NBC, ABC, CNN, 
PBS, and CBN are very powerful communication networks.
Rich dad said, “If you want to be rich, you must build networks 
and link your network with other networks. The reason it is easy to 
become rich through networks is because it is easy to be generous 
through networks. On the other side, people who act alone or as 
individuals limit their chances for economic success.” He went on 
to say, “Networks are people, businesses, or organizations that you 
are generous with because you support them and they support you. 
Networks are powerful forms of leverage. If you want to be rich, build 
a network and network with other networks.”
Our business plan is based on networking with, rather than 
competing against, organizations, especially if they are larger than we 
are. Today, we network with church organizations, network-marketing 
companies, and with publishers in many different countries. We 
work together to make each other stronger and more viable, as well 
as wealthier. There is a give and a take, a sharing of strengths and 
minimizing of weaknesses that makes us all stronger.
We have found that we grow exponentially through being 
cooperative and making sure the people we do business with are 
financially successful. I have noticed that individuals or businesses 
who primarily focus only on making themselves rich or taking more 
than they give do not make good network partners. I have noticed 
that people who want only to take and are more concerned about 
themselves often have to work harder and earn less in the long run.
I was once on a board of a company where it was obvious that 
the president did not care about the company. All he cared about was 
Retire Young Retire Rich209
his pay package and his golden parachute. He did not care about the 
network—in this case, a business with hundreds of employees who 
gave it life. All he cared about was himself. Needless to say, we brought 
in a new president. The key point to being successful in networking 
is to be sincerely interested in first making sure the individuals or 
organizations that you network with are also doing well. You cannot 
only care about yourself, as too many people and organizations seem 
to do.
Over the years, Kim and I have met individuals, consultants, or 
organizations that would only work with us if they were certain that 
they got paid first. In other words, it was the fee we paid them that 
seemed to be more important than the service they delivered.
We hired a consulting firm to come in and look at our internal 
marketing systems. They asked for a sizable fee before they would do 
any kind of work. We paid them, and three months later, their report 
came back. After shifting through the mumbo jumbo of the report, we 
realized that all the report said was that we should retain their firm and 
pay them for three more years. There was not one recommendation on 
how to improve our marketing systems. There was only a proposal for 
more work. That is an example of a vendor putting the vendor’s fees in 
front of the client’s needs. Needless to say, we did not sign a contract.
When I was in high school, rich dad asked me to come and watch 
him hire a new man to manage one of his industrial parks. At the 
meeting in his conference room, there were three applicants. After rich 
dad got through explaining the task, he asked if any of them had any 
questions. The questions were interesting. They were:
• “How much time off will I have each day?”
• “How much sick leave do I have?”
• “What are the benefits?”
• “When do I get a raise and promotion?”
• “How many paid holidays do I get?”
After the meeting, rich dad asked me what I noticed.
Chapter Thirteen210
I replied, “They were only interested in what was in it for them. 
Not one asked you how they could help you build your business or 
what they could do to make the business more profitable.”
“That’s what I noticed,” said rich dad.
“Are you going to hire any one of them?”
“Sure,” said rich dad. “I’m looking for an employee, not a partner. 
I’m looking for someone who wants to make money, not get rich.”
“Didn’t it sound greedy to you?” I asked. For those of you who 
have read my other books, you may recall rich dad always had me 
work for free, rather than for money.
“Yes, it does,” said rich dad. “But we’re all greedy to some extent. 
The reason they will probably not ever become rich is not because they 
are greedy. They will probably never become rich because they are not 
generous enough.”
In other words, their leverage ratio will probably always be 1:1. 
Repeating what rich dad said, “Most people will not ever become rich 
because all they think about is a day’s pay for a day’s work. There is not 
much leverage in a day’s pay for a day’s work because, no matter how 
hard you work or how much you get paid, the ratio is still 1:1.”
One of the reasons rich dad had his son and me learn to work for 
free was so that we would learn to give and build an asset before we 
received. Years ago, rich dad wrote this list to explain his point. Rich dad 
called it the “Who Gets Paid First and Who Gets Paid the Most” list:
1. Asset (business or other investment)
2. Employees
3. Specialists (accountants, lawyers, consultants)
4. Investors
5. Business owner
Retire Young Retire Rich211
Rich dad said, “A business owner must pay the asset first. That 
means continually reinvesting enough money and resources in order 
to keep the asset strong and growing. Too many business owners put 
themselves in front of the asset, the employees, and everyone else. That 
is why their business fails. The reason the business owner gets paid last 
is because he or she starts a business in order to be paid the most. But 
in order to get paid the most, the business owner must make sure that 
the rest of the business is paid first. That is why I am training you to 
not work for money. You are learning to delay gratification and work 
to build assets that grow in value. I want you to learn to build assets, 
not work for money.”
Too many start-up companies fail to follow this list or the advice 
of people like my rich dad. I have met so many people who form a 
business by borrowing money or raising capital from friends, family, 
and other investors. They immediately rent a big office, buy a fancy 
car, and pay themselves huge salaries from investors’ capital rather 
than from income from the business. Because the investors’ capital 
is mismanaged and there is still no income, they then try to pay the 
business, their employees, and specialists as little as possible. In such 
ventures, it is often the investors who get stuck with the bill, as was the 
case in many dotcom start-ups.
Rich dad said to his son and me, “The people who must get 
paid first ultimately get paid the least. The business owner should 
pay himself last because he is in business to build an asset. If he is in 
business for the big paycheck, he should not be in business. He should 
be looking for a job. If the business owner has done a good job at 
paying everyone else to build his asset, the asset should be worth far 
more than he could ever have paid himself.”
Rich dad said, “Most people are not in the world of business to 
build or acquire assets. Most people are in the world of business as 
employees or self-employed specialists because they want a paycheck. 
That is one of the main reasons that less than 5 percent of the U.S. 
population is rich. Only 5 percent of the population realizes the value 
of assets over money.” Rich dad also said, “The business owner or 
Chapter Thirteen212
entrepreneur gets the big bucks at the end of the day because he or she 
must be the most generous at the start of the day. The business owner 
takes the most risks, and also gets paid last. If they have done a good 
job, the amount of money can be staggering.” That is why I continue 
to follow rich dad’s list when starting any business and why I continue 
to work for free. I work for free because I want the big money at the 
end of the day.
Too many people in the E and S quadrants are limited as to how 
many people or organizations they can serve. Hence, their income 
is limited. A true business owner in the B quadrant who focuses on 
building a business that continually serves more and more people will 
become richer and richer. They get the big reward simply because he 
or she builds a system or asset to serve more people. That is why a 
business owner can become rich exponentially, and people who work 
for wages become rich incrementally.
How Fast Can You Get Rich?
The good news is that it has never been easier and less expensive 
to become rich. All you have to focus on is serving more and more 
people. In John D. Rockefeller’s day, it took him approximately 15  
years to become a billionaire. For him to become a billionaire, he had 
to acquire many oil wells and create a network of gas stations and 
gasoline delivery systems. That took a lot of time and a lot of money. 
Today, it would take billions of dollars to build what Rockefeller built.
It took Bill Gates approximately ten years to become a billionaire. 
He had the foresight to use IBM’s network to grow rapidly. It took 
Michael Dell and Steve Case, founder of AOL, less than five years to 
become billionaires. One entrepreneur used the growing demand for 
computers, and the other used the explosive power of the Internet to 
tap into the power of an explosive network. 
For each new generation of entrepreneurs, it takes less time and 
less capital to become billionaires, due to the advent of new networks. 
You can too.
Retire Young Retire Rich213
If you understand the power of networks and the importance of 
leverage ratios, you too can become exceptionally wealthy in a short 
period of time and at a fraction of the cost. If you have solid business 
fundamentals and experience, you can market to the world over the 
Internet. As the cost of doing business goes down, the power of the 
network goes up. One of the reasons Steve Case and AOL (a much 
younger person and company) could buy Time Warner and CNN (an 
older company with older directors) was simply because AOL had a 
bigger network. The bigger the network, the more economic power.
I have often written about people who became very rich in their 
spare time. Many of today’s ultra-rich started their business at home 
on their kitchen table, just as Hewlett-Packard was started in a garage 
and Dell Computer was started in a dorm room. So even if you have 
a low-paying job, you can still become very, very rich if you start a 
business at home or in your garage, all in your spare time. Remember, 
“It is not your boss’s job to make you rich. Your boss’s job is to pay you 
for what you do. It is your job to make yourself rich at home and in 
your spare time.”
It has never been easier to become rich beyond your wildest 
dreams for less effort and less start-up capital. I know that many of the 
high-flying dotcoms went broke, as many of us thought they would. 
In my opinion, the dotcoms that went broke may have had the right 
context, but they did not have the right content. Many dotcoms had 
the right idea, but too many lacked true business experience and 
business basics. Many were simply trying to get rich on a mania, rather 
than to truly serve more people.
I recently read that a company paid its president a salary equivalent 
to over a billion dollars of investors’ money. The  president then ran 
that company into the ground. Another dotcom company paid their 
employees a Christmas bonus equivalent to three months’ salary. That 
same company was bankrupt and out of business before Christmas 
of the next year. That is definitely a case where the mission of the 
company was to make entrepreneurs and employees rich rather 
than serve the customer first. The investors paid for the flaw in the 
Chapter Thirteen214
company’s mission and purpose. They failed to follow rich dad’s 
prior list of who gets paid first and who gets paid last. These people, 
investors included, focused on being greedy rather than on the purpose 
of a business, which is to be generous. 
Today our website receives over 50 percent of its traffic from 
customers who live in countries outside the United States. The purpose 
of the website is for the community to help each other retire young 
and retire rich. All of this work is being done for one purpose, and that 
purpose is to serve as many people as we can. By focusing on being 
generous, we build an asset that builds a network worldwide. 
The More People I Serve, the More Effective I Become
Rich dad said, “Your job is to position yourself and be ready when 
the opportunity presents itself. It is okay to be five years early, but not 
one day late.”
Years ago, rich dad said to me, “People in the B and I quadrants  
have access to infinite wealth. People in the E and S quadrants are 
limited by the limitations of their physical labor. For people in the E 
and S quadrants to move to the B and I quadrants, the first shift is the 
shift to generosity—the desire first to serve more people, rather than to 
get paid first.”
If you look at Sam Walton of Walmart, all he did was build a 
network of large discount stores, stores that brought great products for 
lower and lower prices, to millions and millions of people. That is why 
Sam Walton was worth far more than an attorney who charges $750 
per hour. The key is generosity.
A Final Word on Generosity
During the dotcom mania, there was much talk about old-
economy businesses and new-economy businesses. Regardless whether 
the business is old-economy or new-economy, all successful businesses 
and individuals must follow certain age-old principles and laws.
Generosity falls under the age-old law, the Law of Reciprocity. 
It is the law that states: “Give, and you shall receive.” It is not a law 
Retire Young Retire Rich215
that states, “Receive, and then you give.” It is a law that has survived 
the test of time, and it will survive the test of the future. Today, more 
than ever before, it is very important to want to look after yourself and 
your loved ones. But if you want to be rich, you must first think about 
serving the needs of as many people as you can—first. It’s the law.
Rich dad believed in the Law of Reciprocity and in the idea that 
being generous is the best way to becoming very, very rich. It was his 
context on life. His actions were in integrity with his context.
Rich dad often gave us examples on how to use the Law of 
Reciprocity. He constantly reminded us of the need for us to be 
generous. He would say, “If you want a smile, be the first to give a 
smile. If you want love, be the first to give love. If you want to be 
understood, then be the one to be understanding.” He also said, “If 
you want a punch in the mouth, be the first to give someone else a 
punch in the mouth.”
Not only did rich dad believe in being generous by serving more 
and more people, he also believed in being generous with his money. 
In that line of thinking, he truly believed in the power of tithing, or 
the power of giving money. That is why rich dad gave generously to 
his church, charities, and schools. He gave money because he wanted 
more money. He would often say, “God does not need to receive, but 
humans need to give.”
He would say, “Many people say they are generous with their 
time because they do not have money. People who are generous with 
their time have lots of time because they give their time. They do not 
have much money because they do not give money. They do not give 
money because they are tight and stingy with money, always afraid 
that there is not enough money. Their fear becomes reality. If you want 
more money, give money. If you want more time, give time.”
If you have a hard time giving money, you may want to start giving 
a little at a time on a regular basis. Each time you give, you will hear 
your context, or your reality, speaking loudly to you. At the moment 
you hear your reality speaking to you, if it’s a poor person’s reality, you 
have the opportunity to choose and rechoose your reality. The moment 
Chapter Thirteen216
you give, even if only a dollar, to your church or your favorite charity, 
your world has changed. The moment you sincerely build a business 
or invest to increase your service to more people, you have forever 
increased your chances of becoming extremely wealthy and retiring 
young and retiring rich.
Start by Being Generous to Yourself
Rich dad always said, “Start small, and dream big.” When it comes 
to improving your leverage ratios, rich dad’s advice holds true today. 
In book number four, Rich Kid Smart Kid , I wrote about the three-
piggy-bank system, a system Kim and I use today. One piggy bank 
is for savings, one is for investing, and the other for tithing—giving 
to church and charity. Improving your leverage ratios can begin with 
something as simple as three piggy banks, putting ten cents, fifty cents, 
or one dollar a day in each bank. 
If you put one dollar a day in each bank, after one month, your 
ratios will look like this:
 Savings  1:30
 Investing  1:30
 Tithing  1:30
This is a great start. In 30 days, your ratios are increasing each 
and every day. Imagine what might happen in 30 years. The point to 
remember is that you are really increasing the habit or discipline of 
paying yourself first or being generous to yourself. Rich dad said,  
“One of the reasons poor people are poor is because they treat 
themselves poorly.” And by that, he did not mean to run out and buy 
a new dress or new golf clubs. He meant that poor people do not do 
things that financially enrich themselves. By paying yourself first, you 
are financially enriching yourself, your soul, and your future.

  
“Just do it.”  
 — Nike
“T alk is cheap. Learn to listen with your eyes. Actions do speak 
louder than words. Watch what a person does more than listen to 
what they say.”       
      —Rich dad
219
219
Can Everyone Become Rich?
I once asked rich dad if anyone could become rich. His response 
was, “Yes. What a person must do to become rich is not that 
hard. In fact, getting rich is easy. The problem is that most people 
would rather do things the hard way. Many will work hard all 
their lives living below their means, invest in things they do not 
understand, work hard for the rich rather than work hard to 
make themselves rich, and do what everyone else is doing rather 
than do what the rich are doing.”
The first two sections of this book have been primarily about 
the mental and planning process of acquiring great wealth. Both 
processes are important to retiring young and retiring rich. This 
next section is what one must and can do in order to retire young 
and retire rich. Although the mental and planning processes are 
important, ultimately it is what you do with what you know that 
counts. As rich dad said, “Talk is cheap.”
There are many books written on how to become rich. The 
problem with many of them is that they tell you to do things that 
are often too hard for most people to do. This section is about 
the simple things that almost anybody can do. After reading this 
section, you will know that you have the ability to become very 
rich, if you want to. Or at minimum, you will find one or two 
things you can do that will make you richer, if you choose to do 
them. After reading this section, the only question will be: How 
badly do you want to become rich?Section Three  
THE LEVERAGE OF
YOUR ACTIONS

Chapter Fourteen
THE LEVERAGE OF  
HABITS221
Rich dad said, “There are habits that make you rich, and habits 
that make you poor. Most poor people are poor because they have 
poor habits. If you want to be rich, all you have to do is train yourself 
to have rich habits.”
If you are serious about becoming rich, you must do the following 
things over and over again, from now until forever, for the rest of 
your life. Everyone in the Western world can do and can afford what 
is recommended. The problem is, only a few people will do them…   
and do them… and do them.
Habit #1: Hire a Bookkeeper
At the start of this book, I wrote that it is easier to borrow a 
million dollars than to save a million dollars. There is one catch. 
Before your banker will lend you the million dollars, your banker will 
want to know that you are trustworthy with the money. One of the 
ways the banker will feel comfortable lending you that much money 
is if you have clean, professional financial records in the form of a 
financial statement.
Most people cannot qualify for large loans because they have poor 
records. Many people pay higher than necessary interest rates simply 
because they have poor financial records. In Rich Dad Poor Dad ,         
I wrote about the importance of financial literacy. The basis of 
Chapter Fourteen222
financial literacy is a financial statement. That is what your banker will 
want to see if he or she is to lend you substantial amounts of money.
Even if you do not have a business, your personal life is a business, 
and all real businesses have bookkeepers. That is why I strongly 
recommend you hire a bookkeeper and keep a bookkeeper for life. 
By having a bookkeeper keep your income, expenses, assets, and 
liabilities in line, you begin to keep professional records. I also strongly 
recommend you sit down with your bookkeeper and go over your 
numbers each and every month. Repetition is how we learn, and 
by repeatedly going over your monthly numbers, not only do you 
establish a good habit, you gain more insights into your spending 
patterns, you can make corrections earlier, and you ultimately take 
control over your financial life.
Why not do it yourself? Why hire an outsider? Some of the reasons are:
• You want to start being a B- or I-quadrant person. All 
professional B’s and I’s have professional bookkeepers. So treat 
your personal financial life as a business now. As described in 
Rich Dad Poor Dad , one of rich dad’s six lessons was: Mind 
your own business. That begins with hiring a professional 
bookkeeper.
• You want a disinterested outside third party to look objectively 
at your money and your spending habits. As you know, money 
can be an emotional subject, especially if it is yours. By having 
a person who is not emotionally attached to your finances, he 
or she can put things in order and speak to you clearly and 
logically. I remember my mom and dad not discussing money. 
They argued and cried about money. That is hardly objective 
money management or discussion.
• My poor dad did not want to look at his financial situation. 
He kept our financial troubles a personal secret—a secret from 
himself, his family, and from anyone else. We kids  knew our 
family was in financial trouble, but we did not discuss it. We 
kept our financial problems a secret. Psychologists will tell 
you that family secrets become toxic.  In other words, secrets 
poison the family. I know that the emotional pain from our 
Retire Young Retire Rich223
financial struggles did indeed affect all of us, even though we 
kept it a secret.
• By hiring an unemotionally attached professional bookkeeper, 
you can bring your financial challenges out into the light 
where you can deal with them. By being able to discuss your 
financial statements with your professional bookkeeper, you 
bring the subject of money and the business of your life out 
into the open. If it is out in the open and you are discussing 
your finances with a professional, you are more able to make 
the changes or tough decisions you need to make, before the 
financial problems become toxic.
• If you earn less than $50,000 and are in the E quadrant, a 
professional bookkeeper should not cost more than $100 to 
$200 a month. I hear people say they would rather spend that 
money on food or clothing. The problem with that thinking 
is that spending your money on food or clothing will not 
solve your money problems and will not make you richer. As 
rich dad always said, “There is good debt and bad debt, good 
income and bad income, good expenses and bad expenses.” 
He told me that hiring a bookkeeper and other professional 
financial advisors was money that went for good expenses, 
simply because these were expenses that made you richer, your 
life easier, and prepared you for a better future.
 If you truly cannot afford a bookkeeper, then find one who 
will trade services. You can clean their house or their yard and, 
in exchange, they can do your books. The most important 
thing is to do it, regardless of the price, because the long-term 
price is too high. As rich dad said, “Your greatest expense in 
life is the money you do not make.”
• Most importantly, hiring a professional bookkeeper reaffirms 
to yourself that you are taking your personal financial life 
seriously. It means that at least once a month, you sit down 
with your bookkeeper, you are held accountable, and you 
learn, correct, and redirect the financial future of your life.
Chapter Fourteen224
In Rich Kid Smart Kid , the introduction begins with: “Why your 
banker does not ask you for your report card.” What your banker 
asks for is your financial statement. Rich dad said, “Your financial 
statement is your report card once you leave school.” In school, we 
received report cards at least once a quarter. Even if you had bad 
grades, the report card gave you and your parents the opportunity 
to know what you were good at and weak at, and then gave you the 
opportunity to make corrections. In real life, people without financial 
statements, or report cards, cannot make corrections if they do not 
know where they are that month, that quarter, or that year. Think of 
your financial statement as your report card, and work diligently to 
eventually have your financial report card measured in millions or 
maybe billions of dollars. That is why your bookkeeper is important. 
Your bookkeeper gives you your report card once a month.
There are three steps to follow:
1. Find and hire a bookkeeper.
2. Have an accurate accounting each month of your  
 financial condition.
3. Review your financial statements each month with  
 your advisor so you can make corrections quickly.
Habit #2: Create a Winning T eam
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote that the B quadrant and I 
quadrant were team sports. One of the reasons people from the E and 
S quadrants occasionally have trouble transitioning is because they are 
not used to having a team assisting them with their financial plans and 
financial decisions.
As a child, I noticed that my poor dad shouldered the financial 
problems all by himself. He sat quietly at dinner if he was troubled, 
argued with my mom if he was frustrated about money, and sat alone 
late at night trying to make ends meet. There were many times I 
came home to find my mom crying because she knew that we were 
in financial trouble, and she had no one to talk to. When it came to 
Retire Young Retire Rich225
money, my dad was the man of the house, and he never discussed his 
financial challenges with anyone.
My rich dad, on the other hand, would sit around a table in his 
restaurant, surrounded by his team, and openly discuss his financial 
problems. Rich dad said, “Everyone has financial problems. The rich, 
the poor, businesses, governments, and churches all have money 
problems. What determines if someone is to be rich or poor is simply 
how well he or she handles those problems. Poor people are poor 
simply because they handle their money problems poorly.” That is why 
rich dad discussed his money problems openly with his financial team. 
He said, “No one person can know everything. If you want to win the 
game of money, you want the best and smartest people on your team.” 
My poor dad lost because he thought that he should know all the 
answers—and he didn’t.
After your bookkeeper gives you your monthly financial 
statements, meet with your team on a monthly basis. You may 
want a banker, accountant, attorney, stockbroker, real estate broker, 
insurance broker, and others. Each professional comes to the table 
with a different set of eyes and different ways of solving your problems. 
Just because many opinions are offered does not mean you have to 
follow any of them. It’s important that you do not keep your money 
problems a secret, you listen to people smarter than you in different 
areas of expertise, and ultimately, you make your own decision.
When people ask me how I learned so much about money, 
investing, and business, I simply reply, “My team teaches me.” I have 
learned more about business and investing outside of school simply 
because I use my life as my real-life school. I have found that I am 
more interested in solving my own problems than sitting in school 
trying to solve fictitious ones.
The following is an example of how I use my team to teach me: 
The other day, I met with one of my attorneys who tried to explain 
how to use government tax-exempt bonds. His explanations were way 
over my head, and his vocabulary was filled with words I have never 
Chapter Fourteen226
used before. Rather than waste his time sitting there pretending  
I understood, I stopped the meeting and scheduled another. At the  
next meeting, my accountant and this attorney sat down with Kim and 
me. The two of them helped explain what he was saying to us, in words 
we could understand.
I said earlier that words are tools for the brain. Each profession 
uses different words. For example, attorneys use different words than 
accountants or bookkeepers. By investing the time to fully understand 
the words and by having the meanings translated for me, I am better 
able to use the words and make those words a part of my life. In other 
words, I use the different professionals as translators so I can use their 
words in my life. The more words I can understand and use, the faster  
I can make more money and the better my financial future becomes.
That meeting cost me a few hundred dollars in fees, but I know the 
return will be exponential. It helped me understand how to borrow tens 
of millions of dollars from the government at very low interest rates. 
The combined education from my attorney and my accountant on this 
subject will greatly accelerate my leverage ratios. As I said earlier, you can 
increase your income incrementally or exponentially. By investing in my 
vocabulary and understanding, my wealth will increase exponentially.
So start gathering your team. If you cannot afford a high-priced 
team, you may want to find a retired person who enjoys helping and 
guiding people. Many times, all you have to do is buy them lunch. You 
would be surprised how many people simply enjoy being asked to share 
their life’s experience in order to help others. All you have to do is be 
respectful, not argue, and listen intently. Do this once a month, and 
your future will be enriched forever.
 
Habit #3: Constantly Expand Your Context and  
Your Content
We now live in the Information Age, not in the Industrial Age. 
In the Information Age, your greatest asset is not your stocks, bonds, 
Retire Young Retire Rich227
mutual funds, businesses, or real estate. Your greatest asset is the 
information in your head and the age of your information. Too many 
people are falling behind because the information in their head is 
ancient history, or they cling to answers that were right yesterday but 
wrong today. If you want to retire young and retire rich, you will need 
to keep up with a world of rapidly changing information. 
We are moving into an era of unprecedented opportunity—the 
Age of the Entrepreneur. If all you want is a bigger paycheck, you may 
miss this era while others become super-rich. If you do not want to 
miss this era, I suggest you make it a habit of being ahead of the pack 
and seeing the future the pack cannot see.
Habit #4: Keep Growing Up
The other day, a friend of mine was complaining that he had lost 
several million dollars in the stock market. He was new at investing, 
had borrowed money to buy stocks, and now had lost almost 
everything, including his house, after the market crashed. He kept 
complaining loudly, and I finally had enough. I said, “Grow up. You’re 
a big boy now. What made you think that the stock market would 
always go up?”
My comment did not stop him. He kept on saying, “Why didn’t 
the Fed lower interest rates earlier? Why did they have to raise them? 
It’s their fault and my stockbroker’s fault that I have lost everything. 
How will I pay back all that money? Why doesn’t the federal 
government do something about the losses on the stock market?”
As I walked away, I repeated what I said earlier: “Grow up.”  
Rich dad often said, “People get older, but they do not necessarily 
grow up. Many people run from mom and dad’s shelter to the shelter 
of a company or the government. Many expect someone else to take 
care of them, or be responsible for their lack of wisdom and common 
sense. That is why they seek job security or government sanctuaries. 
Too many people spend their lives looking for guarantees and spend 
all their lives avoiding risk, avoiding growing up, and always looking 
for a surrogate parent to take care of them.” I know many people who 
Chapter Fourteen228
are not able to survive without Social Security. I know people who are 
not yet old enough to collect Social Security, yet they are counting on 
Social Security and Medicare to be there for them in the future. Those 
government safety nets were created in the Industrial Age and were 
created only as safety nets for the very needy. Today, unfortunately, 
many people, even highly educated and highly paid people, are still 
counting on the government to take care of them. 
We are in the Information Age, and it is time that we begin to 
grow up and mature financially. Leave the government safety nets and 
social programs for those who really need them.
When I left high school, I thought I was grown up and knew 
all the answers. Today, I often say, “I wish I knew back then what I 
know today.” There are many things I did in my past that I am glad I 
did, but I would not do them today. Growing up means doing things 
differently as we grow older. To continually do the same old thing 
every day of your life is, in many ways, arrested mental and emotional 
development. The world is changing, growing more sophisticated, and 
so should we.
One of the ways the world is changing is that there is not much 
job security and financial security anymore. Companies are pushing 
people out into the cold, cruel world and saying to them, “Don’t 
expect us to take care of you once you stop working for us.” They 
are also saying, “You’d better count on the stock market to take care 
of you once you stop working.” Yet in the real cold, harsh world, to 
expect the stock market to always go up is childish fantasy and as silly 
as expecting the tooth fairy to pay for your dental bill. Growing up 
means being willing to be more and more responsible for yourself, 
your actions, your continuing education, and your maturity. If you 
want to have a rich and secure financial future, it is imperative to know 
that markets go up and markets come down and no one is there to 
protect you. The faster we grow up and face that reality, the better we 
can then face the future with greater maturity. In the Information Age, 
more of us need to grow up and grow away from old Industrial Age 
ideas of expecting someone else to be responsible for our job security 
and financial security.
Retire Young Retire Rich229
I am afraid that it will soon be obvious that the Industrial Age is 
dead and gone. We will know this when the government finally admits 
that it is broke and will not be able to keep many of its financial 
promises. If too many people panic and begin draining their 401(k)s,  
the stock market will crash, many people will be disappointed, and 
America may go into a deep recession, possibly a depression. If this 
happens, millions upon millions of baby boomers and their children 
will finally have to grow up. Growing up means that you become less 
and less dependent upon others, and are more and more able to take 
care of yourself, your needs, and the needs of others. To me, growing 
up is a lifelong process, a process that many people are avoiding by still 
seeking job security and financial security provided by someone else, 
someone other than themselves.
Continually growing up is an important habit. If you are to retire 
young and retire rich, you will need to grow up much faster than most 
people are willing to.
 
Habit #5: Be Willing to Fail More
One of the biggest differences between my rich dad and my poor 
dad was that my poor dad was unwilling to fail. He thought making 
mistakes was a sign of failure. After all, he was a teacher. My poor dad 
also thought that in life there was only one right answer.
My rich dad constantly ventured into areas that he knew nothing 
about. Rich dad believed in dreaming big, trying new things, and 
making small mistakes. He said to me at the end of his life, “Your dad 
spent his life pretending he knew all the right answers and avoiding 
mistakes. That is why at the end of his life, he began to make big 
mistakes.” Rich dad also said, “One of the great things about being 
willing to try new things and make mistakes is that making mistakes 
keeps you humble. People who are humble learn more than people 
who are arrogant.”
Over the years, I watched rich dad go into businesses, ventures, 
and projects he often knew nothing about. He would sit, listen, and 
ask questions for hours, days, and months as he gained the knowledge 
Chapter Fourteen230
he required. He was always willing to be humble and ask stupid 
questions. He would say, “What is stupid is to pretend you are smart. 
When you pretend to be smart, you are at the height of stupidity.”
Rich dad was also willing to be wrong. If he made a mistake, he 
was always ready to apologize. He did not try to be right all the time. 
He would say, “In school, there is only one right answer. In real life, 
there is more than one right answer. If someone has a better right 
answer than you, take it. Then you have two right answers.” He would 
also say, “People who have only one right answer are very often three 
things. One, they are usually argumentative or defensive. T wo, they 
are often very boring people. And three, they often become obsolete 
because they fail to notice that their once-right answer is now wrong.”
So rich dad’s advice was, “Live a little. Do something daring and 
a little risky every day. Even if you do not become rich, this habit will 
keep your life exciting and keep you younger for years longer.”
Unfortunately, my poor dad spent his life doing all the right 
things. He did the right thing when he went to school. He got a job  
teaching because, in his mind, it was the right thing to do. He worked 
hard and climbed the ladder because it was the right thing to do. 
He ran against his boss because he was upset with the corruption in 
government because it was the right thing to do. At the end of his life, 
he spent 20 years in front of the TV set, angry because he had done all 
the right things and no one seemed to care. He got very angry when he 
thought about all of his peers who he thought did the wrong things, 
but now were rich or in positions of power.
Rich dad said, “Sometimes what is right for you at the beginning 
of your life is not the right thing for you at the end of your life. 
Too many people are unsuccessful simply because they are afraid of 
changing or are unable to change with the times. The reason they are 
unable to change is because they are afraid of being wrong. Sometimes 
to be right, we all need to be wrong. If we want to learn to ride a 
bicycle, we must go through being wrong for a while. Most people 
are unsuccessful simply because they want to be right, but they are 
unwilling to be wrong. It is their fear of failing that causes them to 
Retire Young Retire Rich231
fail. It is their need to be perfect that causes them to be imperfect. It 
is their fear of looking bad that causes them to ultimately feel badly 
about themselves.”
Rich dad’s secret was that the world is designed for us not to fail. 
The world is designed for us to win. The challenge is to be willing to first 
fail so you can win. Once you understand this secret, you will be more 
willing to fail in order to win. As rich dad often said, “People who avoid 
failing also avoid success. Failing is an integral part of success.”
In summary, my rich dad was willing to fail a little each day. My 
poor dad did his best not to fail at all. The difference in these little 
habits made a big difference toward the end of their lives.
Habit #6: Listen to Yourself
The last and most important habit for anyone who wants to retire 
young and retire rich is to listen to yourself. Rich dad often said, “The 
most powerful force I have is what I say to myself and what I believe.” 
This habit is another way of expressing your reality or your context. 
What rich dad meant by “your most powerful force” goes back to the 
Biblical concept that your words become flesh. In other words, pay 
close attention to what you are saying to yourself, because what you 
are saying to yourself is what you are becoming each and every day.
Rich dad would say, “Losers focus a lot on what they don’t want in 
life, rather than be specific with what they do want. That is what they 
do differently. It’s a habit. The same is true with money.”
“So there is a big difference between someone who constantly says, 
‘I don’t want to be poor,’ and someone who says, ‘I want to be rich,’”  
I replied.
Rich dad nodded and said, “It seems to me that the human mind 
does not hear do or don’t. It just hears the subject being discussed—
words such as fat, healthy , poor, and rich. Whatever the subject is, is 
what you become.”
“So when someone says, ‘I don’t want to lose money,’ all the mind 
hears is, ‘I want to lose money’?” I asked, seeking further clarity from 
rich dad’s lesson.
Chapter Fourteen232
“That is how it seems to me,” said rich dad.
“So what many people do is talk about what they don’t want, or 
talk about what they can’t have,” I said.
“That is correct. But I do something more than that. It is one of 
my habits,” said rich dad.
“Something more than just say what you want?” I asked.
Rich dad nodded and gave me one of the most important habits 
for my life. He said, “We all feel frightened, uncertain, and doubtful 
at times. That is part of being human. When I feel that way, the first 
thing I do is check my thoughts. If I feel bad or afraid, I know I am 
saying or thinking something to cause myself to feel that way.”
“Okay,” I said. “What is the next step?”
“I change my thoughts or words to words I want,” said rich dad. 
“For example, if I am afraid of losing, I say to myself, ‘What am I 
afraid of, what do I want instead, and what do I need to do to get 
what I want?’ If you notice, they are all questions that first open up my 
reality to new possibilities and realities.”
I nodded and said, “Then what?”
“Then I sit quietly until the feeling of fear leaves and the feeling I 
want comes into my heart, chest, and stomach area. Once I can feel 
the feeling I want, and I have the thoughts I want, I then take action. 
I prepare myself first, I get into the right frame of mind, the emotional 
feeling I want rather than what I don’t want, then I take action.” 
The summary of this process is:
• Notice thoughts you don’t want. Change to thoughts about 
things you want. 
• Notice feelings you don’t want. Change to feelings you want.
• Take action, and keep going, correcting if necessary, until you 
get what you want—rather than what you don’t want.
Retire Young Retire Rich233
Putting It Into Practice
A few years ago, I was in Las Vegas for the night. I do not gamble 
much, but with time to burn, I decided to play some blackjack. As 
soon as I got to the table, I noticed my body begin to tense up with 
the fear of losing and my mind began saying, “You can only lose $200. 
Then you have to stop.”
Immediately, I changed my thoughts to, “I have $200 to play with 
and when I win $500, I will stop.” I had my entry and my exit strategy 
in place. Then I sat at the table, watching the dealer deal, but I did not 
put up any money. I could feel the fear of losing deep inside my chest. 
I focused my attention on changing the losing feeling to the winning 
feeling. Only when I could feel the confidence of a winner in my 
chest, heart, and stomach did I begin gambling. Even though I lost the 
first few hands, all I did was focus on winning thoughts and winning 
feelings. After an hour, I walked away with my $500.
The other night, I found myself back in Las Vegas. Again, I went 
through the process. The trouble was, this time I could not win, no 
matter how I focused my thoughts and my feelings. Once my $200 was 
gone, I had to fight my feelings to not put up more money. Walking 
away from the table was one of the hardest things I had to do. I wanted 
to chase my money.
As I walked away, I could hear rich dad saying, “Even with the best 
thoughts and best feelings, sometimes things just do not go your way. A 
winner knows when to quit and walk away. A winner must know that 
losing is part of winning. It is only a loser who stays at the wrong table 
forever, losing everything, hoping to prove that they are not a loser.”
Happy Relationships
This process of choosing how you think and feel works in 
relationships as well. I have noticed that I feel terrible when I think 
about all the things my wife, Kim, does not do, and I feel madly in 
love with her when I think about all the wonderful things she does do 
and we do together.
Chapter Fourteen234
The Righteous Brothers had a hit song entitled “You’ve Lost That 
Loving Feeling.” When it comes to business and investing, many 
people have “Lost That Winning Feeling.”
Keeping the Faith
During the period from 1985 to 1994, Kim and I focused on what 
we wanted. We did our best to feel the way we wanted to feel and the 
way we would feel when our dreams did come true. Even though there 
were times when things did not go the way we wanted them to go, it 
was focusing on what we wanted and feeling the way we wanted to 
feel that got us through the tough times. Choosing how you want to 
feel and choosing to think what you want to think are very important 
habits rich dad taught me. (Now if only I could feel and think that 
way about the cold, green salad sitting in front of me… )
The point of this habit is that I go through the thought-and-feeling 
process especially when I feel afraid or doubtful of myself. For me, 
doing that is a better habit than allowing your feelings of doubt and 
uncertainty to run your life. While the process does not always assure 
that I win, it is still a good habit that has allowed me to occasionally 
win when the odds were stacked against me and I wanted to run. 
Always remember that all winners lose now and then, but that does 
not mean they have to feel or think like a loser.
As Nike says, “Just do it.” In life, it seems that what winners do 
is focus on what they want. Losers seem to focus on what they don’t 
want. That is why it is important to make a habit of listening to 
yourself on a regular basis. Winners keep those winning feelings and 
winning thoughts, even though they may not be winning. That is a 
very important habit.
Can You Adopt These Habits?
Before going any further, I want to reemphasize how important 
I believe these basic habits are. These are easy habits that virtually 
anyone over the age of 18 can follow. Yet even though they are easy,  
I am afraid only a very few will make them habits.
Retire Young Retire Rich235
If you can make these simple habits your lifelong habits, the action 
steps in the following chapters will be easy for you and may make 
you richer than your wildest dreams. As rich dad said, “The story of 
‘The Three Little Pigs’ is more than a fairy tale. It is a story filled with 
truths. If you want to build a house of bricks you need good habits. 
Good habits are the bricks of the rich.”

Chapter Fifteen
THE LEVERAGE OF  
YOUR MONEY237
Who Works Harder—You or Your Money?
On March 12, 2001, the financial channels were crying the blues 
about the crash of the stock market. Just a year earlier, the NASDAQ 
had been at an all-time high of 5048.62. On March 12, 2001, the 
NASDAQ was at 1923, a 62 percent fall in approximately a year. Also 
on this single day, shareholders lost $554 billion on all exchanges. 
Obviously, many people were very concerned, afraid, or angry.
On one of the channels, a commentator said something I have 
been concerned about for years. He said, “Many rich investors are 
only getting richer in this market fall. They get rich because they go in 
and out of the market. I feel for the working person that has just had 
their pension plan wiped out. They left their retirement money in the 
market because they have to.”
Kim was also watching the program and listening to the 
commentator. Kim said, “Watching your retirement plan get wiped 
out must be like watching your house burn and not having a hose to 
put the fire out.”
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote that the poor and middle 
class invest in mutual funds and the rich invest in hedge funds. While 
many people claim hedge funds are too risky, I tend to disagree. 
I think mutual funds are far riskier, simply because most mutual 
funds tend only to do well when the markets go up. At least with 
some hedge funds, you can make money in an up market as well as 
Chapter Fifteen238
a down market. Which one do you think is riskier in the long run? 
How would you feel if you were getting ready to retire and you just 
watched your retirement fund get cut in half? At least if you have fire 
insurance, you can rebuild your house in less than a year if it burns 
down. For many people, they may not have enough time to rebuild 
their retirement fund if it is wiped out late in life. 
Is Your Money Just Sitting There Doing Nothing?
One of the reasons people work so hard all their lives is simply 
because they were taught to work harder than their money. When 
most people think of investing, many just park their money either in 
a savings account or in their retirement account, as they continue on 
with their life of hard work. While they work, they hope their money 
is working too. Then, when something like a financial disaster comes 
along, their parked money gets decimated and most people have no 
financial-disaster insurance.
Rich dad said, “Most people spend their lives building financial 
houses of straw—houses which are susceptible to wind, rain, fire, and 
big bad wolves.”
That is why rich dad taught his son and me how to keep our 
money moving. To further illustrate this point, one day on a camping 
trip, he had Mike and me repeatedly jump through and over the 
roaring campfire. He said, “If you’re moving, even fire will not hurt 
you. If you’re standing still near the fire, even though you’re not in the 
fire, the heat will eventually get to you.” That morning, as I watched 
the stock market sink lower and lower, I could hear rich dad telling his 
son and me this story. It is the people who are standing still with their 
money parked that are feeling the heat. If you want to retire young and 
retire rich, you will need to work harder and faster. Your money will 
have to do the same thing. To leave your money sitting in one place 
is like watching a pile of dry autumn leaves and waiting for the spark 
that will turn the leaves into a bonfire.
Retire Young Retire Rich239
How Fast Is Your Money?
One of the reasons Kim and I retired early was because we kept 
our money moving. Rich dad often referred to this concept as the 
velocity of money . He said, “Your money should be like a good bird 
dog. It helps you find a bird, catch the bird, and then goes out and gets 
you another bird. Most people’s money acts like the bird that just flies 
away.” If you want to retire young and retire rich, it is very important 
that your money be like a bird dog, going out every day and bringing 
home more and more assets.
Today, many financial planners and mutual-fund managers say 
to the average investor, “Just give us your money, and we’ll put your 
money to work for you.” Most investors nod and repeat the mantra, 
“Invest for the long term, buy and hold, and diversify.” Their money 
gets parked, and they go back to work. For most investors, these 
are pretty good ideas, given that most investors have no interest in 
learning how to put their money to work, since they seem to prefer 
working harder than their money. The trouble with these plans of 
average investors is that they are not necessarily productive investment 
strategies, nor are they necessarily safer.
Kim and I did not keep our money in a retirement account in 
order to retire young. We knew that we had to keep our money 
working hard to acquire more and more assets. Once our money 
acquired an asset, that money was soon reemployed to go out and get 
us another asset. The strategy we used to keep our money moving and 
acquiring more and more assets is a strategy that almost anyone can 
use. As promised, this book will list things that almost anyone can do 
to become rich.
Keep the Money Moving
One of the strategies we used to keep our money moving was to buy 
a rental property, and within a year or two, borrow out our own down 
payment and buy another rental property. That was following rich dad’s 
advice of using money like a bird dog. The average person calls this 
process a home-equity loan . Some people call it a bill-consolidation loan  
Chapter Fifteen240
to pay off credit-card debt. You may notice that Kim and I borrowed 
money to buy investments. The average person uses debt capital to 
pay off bad debt. This is an example of the bird flying out the window. 
While it is still velocity of money, it is velocity of money going away 
from you, rather than acquiring assets for you.
A Simple Example
The following is an example of how we invested and then borrowed 
money to invest in other assets. In 1990, Kim and I noticed a house 
for sale in a beautiful neighborhood in Portland, Oregon. The owner 
was asking $95,000, but the property did not sell. The economy was 
bad, people were being downsized, and there were many houses on the 
market. We would have put in an offer earlier, but this house did not 
fit our investment profile. It was too expensive and too nice a house 
to be considered a long-term rental property. If this house were in San 
Francisco, it would have been a $450,000 home. Yet we watched this 
property because we could see it had a lot of value and potential.
On our way to and from the airport, we would drive by the 
house to see if it was still for sale. After about six months, we finally 
knocked on the door and found that the owner was very anxious to 
sell and ready to listen to any offers. He owed $56,000, so I offered 
$60,000 and we settled on $66,000. I gave him $10,000, and we 
took over his existing mortgage. A month later, the owner and family 
had moved out and were on their way to California, happy to have 
sold their home. They did not make much money, and they did not 
lose much money. The house rented immediately, and we wound up 
making about $75 a month positive cash flow after paying all debt and 
expenses. About two years later, the market had improved and many 
people were making us offers to buy it, the best offer being $86,000. 
Kim and I did not take the offer, although it was tempting. If we had 
sold, we would have realized approximately a 100 percent per annum 
return on our down payment as illustrated by the following numbers.
 
Retire Young Retire Rich241
 
 $86,000  Offer
          – $66,000  Purchase price 
 $20,000    =  Gain 
   Approximately 200% in 2 years   
   from our $10,000 down payment—
    100% annual cash-on-cash return 
    (I say “approximately” because there  
   would have been other expenses   
   involved in the transaction, and it  
   does not take compounding   
   into account.)
 
Although the 100-percent return was attractive, we did not sell. 
The house was in a great neighborhood, and we felt the house could 
eventually reach the $150,000 range in three to five years. Instead of 
selling this house, we decided to begin buying more, now that the 
market was turning in price and also rental income.
Given the strong market indications, Kim and I applied for a 
home-equity loan. The balance on the mortgage was now less than 
$55,000, and the appraisal came in at around $95,000. The rent could 
cover a mortgage of around $70,000, so we refinanced the house and 
put approximately $15,000 in our pocket. We had gotten our initial 
money back, and we still had the asset. The dog had gotten the bird, 
and we could now go out and find another bird. On top of that, the 
dog was now worth $15,000.
Within a few months, after looking at several hundred 
properties, we found our new target. It was a great house in the same 
neighborhood. The house did not show well since the owner had let 
his children live in it rent-free for years. The asking price was $98,000. 
After several offers and counteroffers, we purchased it for $72,000, put 
$4,000 into paint and repairs, and put it up for rent.
Chapter Fifteen242
Late in 1994, we sold both houses for just under $150,000 each 
and took that money to buy a larger apartment house in Arizona, 
where the market prices were still depressed.
Besides keeping our money moving, there are a number of lessons 
I would like to point out:
• We did well because the market was down. That gave us time to 
look for and negotiate sensible investments. If the market were 
up, we would tend to look harder and be even more cautious.
• The investments had to make sense today, not tomorrow.  
I say this because too many people have the buy, hold, and pray 
strategy. Rich dad always said, “Your profit is made when you 
buy, not when you sell.”  Every property we bought had to have a 
positive cash flow on the day we bought it, and it had to have a 
positive cash flow even in a bad economy. If the market had not 
gone up, Kim and I would still be happy with the investment.
• Every investor has an exit strategy before they enter the 
market. Since this was a new type of market, even though it 
was investing in real estate, it was a different type of real estate 
investment. This difference required that we start over again, do 
our research and come up with different entry and exit strategies.
• Those two houses would probably sell for much more today. 
The reason we sold early was to leave some money on the table 
for the next buyer, to take advantage of another market that was 
down and about to move up (in this case, Phoenix), and because 
our investment portfolio had changed. We no longer held 
single-family homes. We had now graduated to larger and larger 
apartment houses, again for more leverage.
• Know the difference between being an investor and a trader. 
We were investors when we were willing to buy and hold the 
properties for their cash flow. We were traders when we knew 
our entry as well as our exit strategy. In other words, an investor 
buys to hold. A trader buys to sell. If you want to retire rich, you 
need to know how they are different and how to be both.
Retire Young Retire Rich243
 In my opinion, one of the reasons so many people lost money in 
this latest stock market crash is because they were actually being 
traders when they thought they were investors. This further 
illustrates the importance of knowing the definition of words.
• Kim and I invest for the long term. But to us, investing for the 
long term does not mean parking your money, leaving it in one 
big pile, thinking you’re diversified when in reality all of your 
investments are in one vehicle such as mutual funds, and then 
hoping that the wind does not blow or a fire does not break out. 
Investing to us means being in the market every day of our lives, 
gathering more information, gaining more and more real-life 
experience, and keeping our money moving, over the fire. We 
do not buy, hold, and pray, which is what long-term means to 
millions of people.
“I Want My Money Back”
Most shoppers know that they can get their money back if they 
do not like the product they just bought. Most wise retailers offer a 
money-back guarantee if the customer is not satisfied. The problem 
with most money-back guarantees is that, in order to get your money 
back, you have to give the product back first. If you are a sophisticated 
investor, you want your money back and you want to keep the asset 
too. That is the reason I love investing. I get to keep what I purchased 
and also get my money back. That is why rich dad said, “One of 
the most important things a real investor needs to say is, ‘I want my 
money back. I also want to keep my investment.’”
If you can understand this principle of investing, you will 
understand what the velocity of money means. It means you want your 
money back as quickly as possible so it can be reinvested to acquire 
other assets.
 
Chapter Fifteen244
More Than One Way to Speed Up Your Money
This idea of the velocity of your money does not apply only to real 
estate. The idea of velocity of money is really a principle or mental tool 
of the rich. Once you understand the principle, you want to be able 
to apply it to everything you do. Velocity of money is an important 
aspect of leverage.
Another way of increasing the velocity of money is through 
knowing the tax laws and using corporate entities. For example, let’s 
say someone owns a business and also owns part of a second business 
that invests in real estate. The diagram and explanation look like this.
Rent expense  from the widget company flows to the rental income 
of the real estate company. This is important because a business is 
taxed after expenses, while the individual is taxed  before  expenses. So an 
individual who rents a house pays for that house with after-tax dollars. 
The business can pay that rent with pre-tax dollars. The rental income AssetsBALANCE SHEET
LiabilitiesIncome
ExpensesINCOME STATEMENTWIDGET BUSINESS
BusinessRent
Taxes
AssetsBALANCE SHEET
LiabilitiesIncome
ExpensesINCOME STATEMENTREAL ESTATE BUSINESS
Rental propertyRental income
Retire Young Retire Rich245
goes to another corporate entity but this income is now classified as 
passive income, rather than ordinary income. (There is an exception 
where the ownership of the two companies is the same, where the 
income must be treated as ordinary income. For example, if you have 
a business in your home and pay yourself rent, you would have to treat 
that income as ordinary income.) Passive income, if managed properly, 
can flow to the individual or the business paying substantially less in 
taxes. As always, we recommend competent tax and legal advice before 
doing anything like this.
A person who manages his or her business and investment 
portfolio in this manner can keep their money moving faster while 
paying much less in taxes. If it flowed into only one corporate entity,  
it would stagnate and be taxed heavily.
Looking at the asset columns of both businesses, you notice that 
there is the asset of the business in one column and the asset of rental 
property in the other column. In this example, this person’s money 
is being used to create or acquire two assets tax-efficiently. That is 
another example of velocity of money, or money working, rather than 
being parked.
“You Can’t Do That”
Four words I often hear when I use the above example in my 
investment classes are, “You can’t do that.” As you know, these words 
are words that define a person’s reality or context. In my earlier days, 
I would go into small companies and explain these strategies for 
employees of the company.
At the end of my talks, I would almost always hear, “Great ideas, 
but you can’t do that.” The person would often say such things as, 
“You can’t buy real estate that cheap,” or “You can’t buy a house 
without a new mortgage or a banker’s approval,” or “You can’t own 
the business and own the company that rents your business the real 
estate,” or “That might work in America, but that can’t be done in  
my country.”
Chapter Fifteen246
I no longer do such investment talks to employees or self-
employed people. I only do such talks to people who are or want to 
be business owners or investors. I leave traditional investment advisors 
to talk to groups of employees or groups of self-employed individuals, 
not because of the individuals involved, but because of the collective 
consciousness of such groups. As stated earlier, the words, “I can’t,”  
are often the words that define the quadrant a person comes from.
The example used above is done every day throughout the world. 
In all of the countries I have done business in, it is common practice 
to buy a building just by taking over the mortgage, but it is done 
primarily in larger investments. The idea of a business renting real 
estate from another business owned by the same person is also done all 
the time. It is common practice. 
McDonald’s uses that very formula. It sells a franchise business to 
an individual. The individual then pays McDonald’s a franchise fee as 
well as pays rent to McDonald’s for the real estate. From Rich Dad Poor 
Dad, you may recall that Ray Kroc, McDonald’s founder, said,  
“My business is not hamburgers. My business is real estate.” Ray Kroc 
and his team obviously understood the velocity of money and how to 
use money to acquire more than one asset.
Velocity of Money with Paper Assets
The idea of the velocity of money applies to all assets, including 
paper assets. When someone looks at a stock’s P/E ratio, they are 
looking at the velocity in many ways. When someone says the stock’s 
P/E ratio is 20, it means it will take you 20 years to get your money 
back, based upon today’s price and earnings. For example, if a stock’s 
price is $20 today and it’s paying an annual dividend of one dollar, 
then it will take you 20 years to get your money back.
Retire Young Retire Rich247
The Rule of 72
The “Rule of 72” is another measure of money’s velocity. This rule 
measures the interest or annual percentage growth of something.  
The “Rule of 72” is simply dividing the number 72 by the interest 
or the percentage of gain in value to give the relative speed your 
money will double. For example, if you receive 10-percent interest 
on your savings, your money will double in 7.2 years. If your stock is 
appreciating in value by 5 percent per year, it will take 14.4 years to 
double your money. If it appreciates by 20 percent per year, then it will 
take 3.6 years to double in value. 
During the economic boom of the late 1990s, many financial 
planners and investment advisors were touting the wisdom of the 
“Rule of 72.” A number of years ago, I had one young investment 
advisor tell me that his portfolio was doubling in value every five years. 
I asked him how he knew that since he had only been investing for 
three years. His reply was, “Because the mutual fund my money is  
in has averaged over 15 percent per annum for the last two years.”  
I thanked him for his enthusiasm in his attempt to sell me more 
mutual funds, but I declined. I thought about telling him the story  
of the bull and the bear. 
The story of the bull and the bear states that the bull comes up   
by the stairs, but the bear goes down by jumping out the window. In 
other words, as rich dad would say, ‘Averages are for average investors.”
Playing with House Money
One more way an investor can use the velocity of money in their 
favor is by playing with house money.
There are two reasons I like small-cap stocks. Reason number one 
is because I am an entrepreneur rather than a corporate person. I like 
and understand the problems of small start-up companies and can 
sense if the business has a chance for growth or not. Reason number 
two is because a small-cap stock can double and triple in value much 
faster than a blue-chip stock. Since a small-cap stock has a better 
chance of doubling or tripling faster than many large-cap stocks in 
Chapter Fifteen248
the right market conditions, it is easier to play with house money. The 
following is an example of playing with house money.
Let’s say you buy 5,000 shares of XYZ company for $5 a share. 
You now have $25,000 in the market. The market shines on you and, 
in less than a year, the price of XYZ is now $10 a share. You now have 
a market valuation of $50,000. A greedy investor, which I have been, 
will say, “The market will keep going up so I’ll hang on.” Again, an exit 
strategy is important before getting into the market.
Instead of hanging on and just parking your money, one way to 
increase the velocity of your money is to simply sell $25,000 worth of 
stock. That way, you still have $25,000 worth of stock, although half 
the shares in this case, and you have your initial investment back. The 
remaining shares which have the $25,000 valuation at that time is 
playing with house money.
I use this strategy often, but not all the time. There have been 
times when the price of the stock went from $5 to $8, not reaching the 
exit price of $10, so I held on. Many times, the stock has not held and 
dropped below $5, leaving me with all my money either lost or still on 
the table. I will admit that the times I have used this strategy of selling 
shares to recoup my initial investment, I have felt much better about 
my investment, even though I may not have made as much money, 
due to the fact that I did pull some money from the table.
Bye-Bye Money
There is a short poem that goes:
       Money talks, I can’t deny. 
       I heard it once. It said bye-bye.
I have never understood why people cry about losing money in the 
investment market. They don’t cry when they go to the grocery store and 
spend money they don’t get back. They don’t cry when they buy a car and 
lose money when they sell it. So why should investing be any different?
I often hear investors say, “You haven’t lost any money as long 
as you don’t sell the stock.” When I hear someone saying something 
Retire Young Retire Rich249
like that, it often means they bought high and now the price is low 
and they are waiting for the stock price to go back up. There is some 
validity to thinking that way, but only in special-case situations. 
A thought opposite to that thought is, “Cut your losses early.” 
There are times when I have invested poorly, and the price of my 
investment drops rather than climbs. If the price of a stock drops more 
than 10 percent, I will, more often than not, cut my losses and look 
for something new. There are two reasons I may do this.
1.  If my attention is focused too much on the loss and I feel 
badly for making a bad decision, I will sell. I just want to cut 
and move on. I know that out of ten investments, odds are 
that two to three will be bad, two to three will be good, and 
everything in the middle just lies around like a lazy dog. I will 
occasionally let the lazy dogs lie as long as they are not losing 
money. If they become real dogs, I cut and review my mistakes 
and take the lessons.
2.  I love shopping. So even if I have less money to shop with, I 
am happier shopping rather than buying, holding, and praying 
that the investment will go back up someday. As I said, most 
people don’t cry when they sell their formerly new, now used, 
car for a loss. The reason they don’t cry is because they’re 
usually shopping for a new car.
How Long Are Blue Chips Blue?
There is another investment strategy I often hear and that is,  “Invest 
for the long term and only buy blue chip stocks.” To me, that is an 
obsolete idea because it worked in the Industrial Age, but it doesn’t 
work in the Information Age. The reason that old strategy doesn’t work 
anymore is because blue-chip stocks are not blue chips anymore. For 
example, if you had invested in Xerox 20  years ago, you would be 
hurting today, even though it is a blue-chip stock. The real question each 
of us needs to ask is: How long will a blue-chip stock be blue?
Chapter Fifteen250
Many of today’s Fortune 500 companies may not exist ten years 
from now, due to technological changes and other innovations. Blue-
chip companies, which used to last for 65 years, are now lasting only 
ten. The old strategy of business is no longer working in today’s world.
In this age of faster-moving technology, a company may rise and 
fall in just a few years. This speed of change then requires all of us to be 
more vigilant and to focus on keeping our money moving, rather than 
just leaving it parked waiting for the market to rise and rise forever. The 
buy, hold, and pray strategy is okay for the average investor, but it is not 
a great strategy for anyone who wants to retire young and retire rich.
Chapter Sixteen
THE LEVERAGE OF 
REAL ESTATE251
Investing with Your Banker’s Money
I had dinner with a friend and her father the other night. He’s a 
retired airline pilot. The stock market had just fallen another 3 percent 
that day and he was very upset because his retirement account was losing 
all its gains. When I asked him what he thought of the market, he said, 
“My other daughter called to let me know that I could move in with her 
if I lost everything.”
Cautiously I asked, “Do you mean to say that the only investments 
you have are in the stock market?”
“Well, yes,” he said. “What other kinds of investments are there? The 
stock market is the only place I know of. What else is there to invest in?”
De-Worsify Your Portfolio
The common mantra heard everywhere today is, “Invest for the 
long term, dollar-cost-average, diversify your portfolio, etc., etc, 
etc.” This is a great mantra for people who do not know much about 
investing. The word I have always questioned is diversify . When I hear 
someone say they have a diversified portfolio, I often ask them what 
they mean by that word. More often than not, they will say something 
like, “I have some growth funds, bond funds, international funds, 
sector funds, mid-cap funds,” and so on.
 My next question is, “Are they all in mutual funds?” Again, 
in most cases, the response is, “Yes, most of my investments are 
Chapter Sixteen252
diversified in different mutual funds.” While their mutual funds may 
be diversified, the reality is that their investment instrument of choice, 
in this case mutual funds, is not diversified. Even if they say, “I do 
dabble in stocks, invest in REITS, and I do have some annuities,” the 
hard fact is that most people are only in the paper-asset category. Why? 
Because paper assets are easier to get into and manage. As rich dad 
said, “Paper assets are more sterile. They are neater and cleaner. Most 
people are not from the B quadrant and will never build a B-quadrant 
business and most people will not invest in real estate because of the 
acquisition, liquidity, and management challenges.”
There are over thousands of mutual funds to choose from in the 
United States alone. There are more mutual funds than there are 
companies that mutual funds invest in. Why are there so many mutual 
funds? Because of the same reasons listed above. They are sterile and 
often sterilized in the name of protecting the public. The problem 
the public has is figuring out which of the thousands of funds is best 
for them. How do you know if the hot fund today will be the hot 
fund tomorrow? How in the world do you choose the winning fund 
today for your retirement tomorrow? And if over 80 percent of your 
investment portfolio is in mutual funds, is that really diversification 
and is that smart? Personally, I don’t think so. Anyone who has 80 
percent or more of their portfolio in different funds is not really 
diversifying. They are really de-worsifying  their portfolio.
The Tragic Flaw of Mutual Funds
Some of you may be aware of the hidden tax flaw of mutual finds. 
Unfortunately, there are many mutual-fund investors not aware of the 
mutual-fund tax flaw, the flaw that passes capital-gains tax through 
to the investor. That means, if there is a profit and a capital-gains tax 
consequence, the fund does not pay that tax. The investor does. This 
flaw is especially pronounced in a bear market. There are exceptions, 
however. For instance, gains on mutual funds held in certain 
retirement funds are deferred.
Let’s say the fund has had great success for a number of years. 
It has bought well and many of the stocks it has picked have greatly 
Retire Young Retire Rich253
increased in value. Suddenly, the market turns down, investors panic, 
and they begin asking for their money back. The fund must then sell 
its best stocks quickly in order to give the investors their money. When 
the fund sells its stock, there are capital gains to pay on that stock. For 
example, the fund purchased XYZ Corp. ten years ago for $10 a share, 
and when they sell it, it sells for $50 a share. So the fund manager did 
well by picking the stock early, but now at time of sale, the investor 
must pay the capital-gains tax on the $40 profit. In times like this, 
the investor can lose money because the value of the fund may have 
gone down while, at the same time, the investor must pay capital-gains 
taxes. So an investor in mutual funds can be required to pay capital-
gains taxes, even though he has lost money rather than made money. 
Personally, I do not like having to pay taxes when I have, in fact, lost 
money. That is like paying income tax on income you did not receive. 
To me, that is a tragic flaw.
The Beauty of Investing in Real Estate
My friend’s father, the retired airline pilot who thought the only 
kind of investment is paper assets, is only now finding out about 
mutual funds’ tragic flaw. As the dinner neared an end, he said, “I’ve 
lost much of my savings because the share value of my funds has gone 
down and now I have to pay capital-gains taxes even though the value 
is down. I wish there were something else I could invest in.”
“Why don’t you invest in real estate?” I asked.
“Why? What is the difference?” he asked.
 “There are many differences,” I replied. “Let me tell you about one 
difference that is really quite interesting.”
The retired pilot took a sip of coffee and said, “Tell me. I’m all ears.”
“In real estate, I can make money, and the government will let me 
count it as a loss of money,” I said.
“You mean you make money, and you get a tax break instead of 
having to pay taxes on the money you made?” asked the pilot.
“The government gives me a tax break on my gains rather than 
making me pay taxes on my capital gains,” I said. “The government 
Chapter Sixteen254
lets me keep more money rather than pay more taxes. One way is 
through depreciation, or what my rich dad called  phantom cash flow , 
which is cash flow the average investor cannot see.”
The retired pilot listened silently for a long moment and finally 
asked, “Is there more?”
“A lot more,” I said. “They’ll even give me money.”
“How?” asked the pilot.
“If a building is a historical building, the government may give you 
a tax credit, which is far better than a tax deduction, to improve your 
investment,” I said. “Do you think the government will give you a tax 
credit to buy more mutual funds?”
“Not that I know of,” said the pilot. “All I have seen lately is a 
capital-gains tax on money I’ve never made and, in fact, have lost. It 
sounds like I pay taxes on money I’ve lost, and you get a tax break on 
money you made. Anything else I should know about?”
“There is,” I said. “You can receive a tax credit for 50 percent of 
the cost of improvement related to the Americans with Disabilities 
Act. For instance, if you pay $10,000 putting a wheelchair ramp in for 
handicapped people to have access to your commercial building, you 
could receive the maximum credit of $5,000.”
“You get a $5,000 tax credit?” asked the pilot. “What if the 
wheelchair ramp doesn’t cost you $10,000 to put in? What if the ramp 
only costs you $1,000 to build?”
“You still get a tax credit for 50 percent of the cost of the 
improvement,” I said. “But of course, I strongly advise you to check with 
your CPA before doing anything like this. You want to make sure you 
know the current regulations and benefits before doing anything.”
The pilot sat there quietly thinking. “Anything else?”
“Much more. Really too much to discuss just over dinner,” I said. “But 
let me give you three more advantages of real estate over mutual funds.”
“Just three more?” said the pilot with a sarcastic smile.
“One more advantage is that the bank will lend you the money to 
buy your real estate. As far as I know, banks will not lend you money to 
Retire Young Retire Rich255
invest in mutual funds or stocks. They may use such assets as collateral, 
but only after you have invested your own money to acquire them.”
The pilot nodded his head and said, “And number two?”
“Number two is no capital-gains tax,” I said, “if you know what 
you are doing.”
“You mean I must pay capital-gains tax on money I did not make, 
in fact lost, and with real estate you can avoid capital-gains tax?”
I nodded my head. “It’s done all the time via an exchange called 
the 1031 exchange. For example, let’s say I buy a house for $50,000, 
putting only $5,000 down and borrowing the remaining $45,000 
from the bank. And let’s say the rent more than covers my monthly 
expenses so I have cash flow from my investment.”
“So your money is working for you,” said the pilot.
“Yes,” I said, “and that income is passive income so it is taxed at a 
lower rate than ordinary income such as paycheck income and income 
from savings and your 40l(k).”
The pilot shook his head in silence. Earlier in the evening, we 
had already discussed the differences between ordinary, portfolio, and 
passive income.
Continuing, I said, “After a few years, you find out your $50,000 
rental house is now worth $85,000. You sell it for a $35,000 gain, but 
you do not have to pay the capital gains if you want to put it into a 
bigger investment.”
Again the pilot shook his head silently, saying, “In this example, 
you make $35,000 in capital gains and pay no capital-gains tax. I lose 
money in my mutual funds, and I pay capital-gains tax. You receive 
cash flow and have that income offset by phantom losses and expenses, 
and you pay less in taxes on the income that you do pay taxes on, 
because it’s passive income, not ordinary income.”
“And don’t forget the tax credits for improvements made for ADA 
in a commercial property or if the property is historical,” I added.
 “Oh no,” said the pilot. “How could I forget the tax credits? 
Everyone knows about tax credits. So what is the third point?”
Chapter Sixteen256
“The third point is that the bigger the real estate investment, the 
more the banks and the government want to lend you money,” I said.
“Why is that?” asked the pilot.
“When you go to your banker with a real estate investment over, 
let’s say, a million dollars, the banker is not lending money to you. The 
banker is lending money on the property.”
“What is the difference?” asked the pilot.
“When the average person goes to the bank to ask for a loan, the 
bank evaluates the credit-worthiness of the individual. When this same 
person wants to buy, let’s say a small rental property, a property such as 
a condominium or house or duplex, the banker still evaluates primarily 
the person. As long as you have a steady job and enough income to 
pay for these smaller properties, the bank will often lend you, not the 
property, the money.”
“But on bigger properties, when the price of the property is far 
beyond the income of the individual, the bank then looks at the 
income and expenses of the property itself,” said the pilot. “Is that  
the difference?”
“Pretty close,” I said. “On larger properties, the asset really is  
the property and its income stream, not the individual borrower’s 
income stream.”
“So it can be easier to buy a bigger property rather than a smaller 
property,” said the pilot.
“If you know what you’re doing,” I said. “The same is true with 
borrowing from the government. If you go to the government with 
a $150,000 property, in many cases the government agency is not 
interested. But if you want to acquire a property that is a slum and you 
want to convert it to safe low-income housing, the government has 
millions of dollars to lend. In fact, if your investment is not over $5 
million, it’s hard to get anyone in the government to become interested 
in your property.”
“Anything else?” asked the pilot.
“The list goes on,” I replied. “But let me give you the downside to 
real estate.”
Retire Young Retire Rich257
“Such as?” asked the pilot.
“Real estate is, in most cases, not as liquid as paper assets. That 
means it can take longer to buy and sell real estate. The real estate 
market is also not as efficient as the paper market. And real estate  can 
be management-intensive,” I said with a smile.
“Why are you smiling?” asked the pilot.
“Because the disadvantages are often the biggest advantages to the 
professional real estate investor,” I said. “The disadvantages are often 
only disadvantages to new or unsophisticated investors.”
“Give me an example,” said the pilot.
“Very briefly,” I replied, “because real estate is not as liquid and 
it can be harder to find a buyer or seller, the professional investor can 
often take his time to make a deal.”
“You mean you can do a little one-on-one negotiation with the 
seller,” said the pilot.
“Or the buyer,” I replied. “In the stock market, it’s often just 
buy or sell. Very seldom is there any kind of one-to-one negotiation 
between buyer and seller, at least not for most investors.”
“You mean there can be one-to-one negotiations between buyers 
and sellers in the stock market?” asked the pilot.
“Yes,” I replied. “But that goes into the gray area of insiders and 
professional players. It can be done legally, but it is not usually done by 
the average investor.”
“Oh,” said the pilot. “But it is done all the time in real estate.”
“That’s the fun of real estate,” I replied. “That is where you can 
become creative, negotiate terms, cut a better deal, lower the price, 
or raise the price. Ask the seller to throw in a boat or pay your down 
payment for you. It becomes fun, once you learn the game.”
“What else?” asked the pilot.
“You can reduce expenses, improve the value of the property, 
add an extra bedroom, paint the place, sell off some extra land, and 
on and on. Real estate is great for the creative investor who is a good 
negotiator. If you are creative and a good negotiator, you can make a 
fortune in real estate, as well as have a good time.”
Chapter Sixteen258
“I never saw it that way,” said the pilot. “All I’ve ever done is buy 
and sell the houses my family has lived in. But come to think of it, 
that was kind of fun and I have made a better return on my houses 
than I have made on my mutual funds.”
I could see the light was going on in his head. He could now see 
that there was something else he could invest in besides de-worsifying 
his portfolio with mutual funds. While the lights were coming on in 
his head, it was getting late and time to head home. 
A few weeks later, he called to tell me he was out looking for his first 
rental property and he was having fun, instead of worrying. He said, 
“Even though my rental income breaks even with my expenses, I can 
still make money in real estate. Understanding phantom cash flow and 
the tax laws is like winning financially without making any money.”
All I said was, “You’re beginning to understand.”
Bad Advice from Advisors
Financial advisors are important. The problem is, many financial 
advisors are not rich nor are they successful investors. In a major U.S. 
publication, a certified financial planner had this to say about my advice 
on real estate: “Lots of people have made lots of money in real estate, but 
primarily in places like California or Connecticut. Our clients who are 
here in the Midwest haven’t experienced that kind of thing.”
Her clients should fire her. The reason her clients in the Midwest 
have not made any money in real estate is because they have her as an 
advisor. If you understand real estate, tax laws, and corporate laws, 
and have a good broker and accountant, you can make money in real 
estate even though the property does not increase in value or turn a 
profit from rental income. Her report about property increasing in 
value only in California and Connecticut is also wrong. If she knew 
her property market, she would know that the fastest-growing real 
estate markets in America were Las Vegas, Nevada, for small cities, 
and Phoenix, Arizona, for large-city growth. She only heard about 
California and Connecticut because she only knows what is in the 
news, and most investment news is about paper assets. She does not 
Retire Young Retire Rich259
know what professional real estate investors know, yet she gives advice 
as if she does know.
As rich dad often said, “Never ask an insurance salesperson if you 
should buy insurance.” Most financial planners are primarily insurance 
salespeople, not investors. Insurance is a very important investment 
product, but it is not the only investment product.
 
How to Find a Great Investment
As with any investment, I am often asked, “How do I find a good 
real estate investment?” My answer is, “You must train your brain to 
see what others cannot see.”
The next question is, “How do I do that?”
The answer is, “The same way any shopper finds a good deal.” At 
the start of this book I wrote about people who focused on saving 
by driving from store to store shopping for food bargains. The same 
is true for real estate, or for any investment. You need to become a 
professional shopper.
100:10:3:1
A great strategy for shopping for property is the 100:10:3:1 method. 
That means you should analyze 100 properties, make offers on ten of 
them, have three sellers say yes, and then buy one. In other words, it 
takes shopping and looking at over 100 properties to buy one property.
Kiss Many Frogs
As you know, rich dad loved fairy tales as teaching tools. He loved 
the story of the princess who had to kiss a frog in order to find her 
handsome prince. Rich dad often said, “You have to kiss a lot of frogs 
in order to know which one is a prince.” In investing, and in many 
aspects of life, that statement holds true. Today, I am always amazed 
Chapter Sixteen260
when I hear that someone took a job at age 25 and stayed there all 
their life. I wonder how they know the difference between a good job 
and a bad job. When I meet a person who decided to be a doctor at 
age 15, I wonder if they really used reality in making their decision. 
The same is true in relationships and in investing.
Rich dad said, “Most people avoid kissing frogs, and end up 
marrying them instead.” What rich dad meant was that when it comes 
to investing and their future, most people do not take enough time 
kissing. Instead of taking the time to look for good investments, most 
people act on impulse, hot tips, or let a friend or relative manage their 
financial investments.
 
Marrying a T oad
A friend of mine recently came to me and said, “I took your advice 
and invested in a rental property.”
Curious, I asked, “What did you buy?”
“I bought a nice condo near the beach in San Diego.”
“How many properties did you look at?” I asked.
“T wo,” she said. “The broker showed me two units in the same 
complex, and I bought one.”
About a year later, I asked how her real estate investment was 
doing. “I’m losing about $460 a month,” she replied.
“Why so much?”
“One reason is because the board that runs the homeowners 
association raised the monthly maintenance fee. The other reason is 
that I did not know how much rent per month I could collect. It was a 
lot lower than I thought,” she said a little sheepishly. “I’ve tried to sell 
it, but I found out that I paid $25,000 more than the market is willing 
to pay. I don’t want to lose money every month, but I can’t afford to 
lose $25,000 by selling it for less than I paid for it.”
As rich dad would say, “That is the price of not kissing enough 
frogs. If you don’t kiss enough frogs, you can wind up marrying a 
toad.” Because my friend did not do her homework, she wound up 
marrying a toad, an expensive one.
Retire Young Retire Rich261
How do you evaluate a good real estate investment? Experience is 
the greatest teacher. Outlined below are ten very important lessons my 
friends and I have learned along the way. In addition, I will outline 
several other resources which may be helpful to you.
The Price of Not Going Shopping
When people ask me how I learned to find a great real estate 
investment, I simply say, “You need to go shopping.”
I practice the 100:10:3:1 formula for finding a great investment. 
Over the years, Kim and I have looked at and analyzed literally thousands 
of properties. When we are asked, “How did you learn so much about 
real estate?” we simply say, “We have looked at thousands and thousands 
of investment opportunities.” We have also made hundreds of offers 
to buy property, many offers that were laughed at. The point is, with 
each property we looked at and each offer we made, our knowledge and 
experience about the property market and human nature grew.
When we are asked, “What do you do when you don’t have any 
money?” the answer is the same, “Go shopping.” In my investment 
seminars, I often say, “When you go to a shopping center, no one asks 
you if you have any money. The retailers want you to shop and browse. 
The same is true with most investments. Shopping, asking questions, 
and analyzing deals is how I got my education. What I learned about 
investing cannot be found in a book. Just as you cannot learn to play 
golf from a book, you cannot train your brain to see investments others 
cannot see from a book. You must get out and go shopping.”
Hindsight Is 20/20
My friend who married the toad could have learned a few valuable 
lessons if she hadn’t decided to say, “Real estate is a lousy investment. 
You can’t make any money in real estate.” When I asked her what she 
had learned, she angrily said, “I should never have listened to you. The 
market has changed. You cannot make money in real estate today.”
There is a saying that goes, “Hindsight is 20/20.” The problem is, 
you do have to turn around and look behind you. My friend did not 
Chapter Sixteen262
look and learn. Even after I complimented her for taking action, she 
was still convinced that real estate is a lousy investment, which means 
her foray into real estate is extra-expensive because she failed to learn 
from her priceless mistakes—mistakes and lessons that could have 
made her smarter and richer in the future. That is the price for having 
a context that says, “Mistakes are bad.” If she had a context that said, 
“I’ve taken action, I’ve made some mistakes, and now I can learn from 
those mistakes,” she would be a much richer person. People who must 
be perfect, or cannot allow themselves to make mistakes, are often 
people without much 20/20 vision. They are the people who make the 
biggest mistake, which is to fail to learn from their mistakes.
The lessons my friend overlooked from this one simple investment are:
• Look at more properties.
• Take your time. There is more than one good deal. Too many 
people buy because they believe the deal they have found is the 
only deal in the world.
• Analyze the rental market as well as the purchase market.
• Talk to more than one real estate salesperson.
• Be careful of investing in condominiums. Condominiums 
most often have a board of directors made up of homeowners. 
Homeowners and investors do not always see eye to eye. Most 
homeowners want to keep their property nice, so they spend 
excessively on maintenance. While it is good to keep up your 
property, an investor loses control over that very important 
area of investing, the area of expense control.
• If expenses are out of control, that also affects the future sales 
price of the property.
• Never buy expecting the price of the property to go up. The 
property should be a good investment in a good economy 
and in a bad economy. As rich dad always said, “Your profit is 
made when you buy, not when you sell.”
Retire Young Retire Rich263
• Don’t invest emotionally. When you buy your own personal 
investment, it is okay to get emotional. When you buy a 
property for investment purposes, emotions can blind you. 
My friend was more excited about the beach being near the 
property than by the return on investment. She looked at the 
beach rather than the financial statements.
• There was not much she could do to improve the property. 
One of the ways you can make a lot of money is by having 
control over changing, modifying, or improving the value of 
the property, something you cannot do with stocks or mutual 
funds. Many times, just adding a garage or an extra room can 
greatly multiply your return on investment.
• She did not learn from this experience. Although a relatively 
expensive lesson, she could have turned the cost of this lesson 
into millions of dollars if she had been willing to be humble, 
learn, and try again. Instead, she would rather say, “You can’t 
make money in real estate.”
Mistakes Improve Your Vision
By investing the time to analyze thousands of investments, my 
vision slowly improved. Each time I made an offer to buy a property,  
I learned something, even if the offers were laughed at or flatly 
rejected. Each time I arranged financing with a banker, I learned 
something. Each time I bought a property, I learned something 
new and valuable, even if I lost money on the property. Today, the 
accumulation of all those lessons, good and bad, is the education and 
experience that make me rich and allow my wife and me to make more 
and more money in real estate.
Great investments are seen in your mind’s eye, and nowhere else. 
In the real world, there aren’t “For Sale” signs that say, “Here is a 
great deal.” All the signs say is, “For Sale.” It is your job to train your 
brain to see a great deal and to also negotiate a great deal. That takes 
dedication and practice.
Chapter Sixteen264
What Everyone Can Do
As promised, I stated that everyone can do what it takes to become 
rich. The thing that everyone can do is go shopping for real estate. If 
you and a partner will agree to look at 5, 10, 20, or 25 properties a 
week, even if you have no money, I promise you that your vision will 
improve. After analyzing 100 deals, I know that you will find one 
or two investments that will excite you. When you are excited about 
becoming rich, your brain shifts into another context and you begin 
to seek new content that can answer the question, “How do I raise the 
money so I can get rich?”
Everyone can do this, even if they do not have any money. This 
is all Kim and I do on a regular basis. Now that we have a little more 
experience, the process of analyzing properties goes faster. In the best 
and worst of economies, we have always managed to find a great deal. 
We don’t always buy them or put offers on them, but the process of 
looking for investments and analyzing them keeps our minds sharp 
and it keeps us in touch with the abundance of opportunities to be 
found, if only you would just go looking for them.
One last point. Investing in real estate, or any investment product 
for that matter, requires more than buying one thing and expecting 
that one product to make you rich. In real estate, if Kim and I 
have a plan to buy ten properties, that means we need to look at 
1,000 properties. Of those ten properties, we expect two to be great 
investments and two to be dogs, investments that we could lose money 
on. These are generally sold immediately. That leaves six investments 
that we either have to improve or sell. Regardless if it is real estate, 
stocks, mutual funds, or building businesses, the ratios tend to remain 
the same. A professional investor knows this.
Rewards That Others Missed
Every fisherman has a story of “the one that got away.” Every real 
estate investor has a story of the one he or she found, the one that others 
missed. The following are two stories that are written for the purpose of 
inspiring you to begin looking at your first 100 investments.
Retire Young Retire Rich265
Turning Problems into Opportunities
Story number one: A few years ago, Kim and I were traveling in the 
mountains, a few hours away from our home. We had decided to take 
a few days off and enjoy the peace and solitude of the forests. As we 
always do, we stopped at a real estate office and looked at what they 
had for sale. The agent showed us the usual overpriced properties that 
we passed on. Then in her sales book, she had a run-down little cabin 
with fifteen acres of land listed at only $43,000. I asked her why it was 
so underpriced.
Her reply was, “It has a water problem.”
“What kind of water problem?” I asked.
“The well does not always provide enough water. It is intermittent. 
That is why it has been for sale for years. Everyone loves it, but it just 
doesn’t have enough water.”
“Take me to see it,” I said.
 “Oh, you won’t like it,” she replied, “but I will take you there.”
About half an hour later, we were walking this lovely piece 
of forested land with a lovely old cabin sitting on it. “This is the 
problem,” the real estate agent said as she took us to the well. “This 
well and land does not have enough water.”
Nodding, I said, “Yes, this water problem is serious.”
The next day, I went back to the property with a well expert from 
the area. He looked at the well and said, “This problem can easily be 
solved. The well produces enough water, but it produces it at different 
times. All you need to do is add an extra holding tank and the problem 
is solved.”
“How much is a holding tank?” I asked.
“A 3,000-gallon tank will cost you $2,300 installed,” he said.
Nodding, I went back to the real estate office and made my offer. “I’ll 
offer the seller $24,000 for the property.”
“That’s really low,” she said, “even with a water problem.”
“That is my offer,” I replied. “By the way, when was the last time an 
offer was presented?”
Chapter Sixteen266
“It’s been a long time,” she said. “I believe it’s been more than a year.”
That night, the agent called and said, “I can’t believe it. Your offer has 
been accepted. I can’t believe they accepted your price and your terms.”
“Thanks,” is all I said. In my head and heart, I was jumping up and 
down with excitement. The seller had not had an offer in more than a 
year and was sick and tired of paying to make repairs to the house. The 
seller had accepted my price, my down payment of only $2,000, and the 
terms of only paying him the balance in a year. In other words, I got the 
property for a small down payment and no payments for a year.
The next morning, I met with the well expert and asked him to 
install two 3,000-gallon tanks. The water problem was solved for less than 
$5,000. A month later, Kim and I went to stay in our new cabin, with 
lots of fresh water. As we left town, we put the property up for sale. We 
listed it for $66,000 and it was sold two weeks later. The problem was 
solved, and the property is in the hands of a young couple who now have 
their dream home in the mountains.
A Change of Context
Story number two:  I have a friend, Jeff, who is a landscape architect. 
He told me a great real estate investment story that I will pass on to you.
Jeff said, “About a year ago, a woman called and said, ‘I have 40 acres 
of land I want you to look at.’ She had purchased this piece of land for 
$275,000 on an option. The small town the land was in was against any 
kind of development.”
“Why did she call you?” I asked.
“She wanted me to draw a vision of the future for the town and the 
property. She had also hired a former city planner to be part of the team.”
“So what happened?” I asked.
“Well, we did our drawings, wrote our proposal for the future, and 
went before the city council. We were turned down three times,” he said.
“Why?” I asked.
“The city council had concerns and kept asking us to revise our 
drawings and our proposal.”
Retire Young Retire Rich267
“They kept asking you back?”
“More or less. In reality, we kept asking for their concerns and 
we kept coming back with plans and drawings that addressed their 
concerns. Finally, the council approved our plan and then rezoned the 
property from agriculture to commercial.”
“They rezoned your property?” I asked. “From agriculture to 
commercial? How much did that rezoning increase the value of the 
property?” I asked.
“After her plans were approved, she sold the property to a national 
insurance company for $6.5 million. They’re going to put a large hotel 
on the property.”
“How long did the process take?” I asked.
“A total of nine months,” said Jeff. “She paid the city planner and 
me $25,000 each, as agreed.”
“So she spent $50,000 and made nearly $6 million?” I gasped.
My friend Jeff smiled and nodded his head. “That property had sat 
there for years. Everyone looked at it and said it was too expensive. But 
she could see what we could not see, and she professionally went about 
showing all of us what was right beneath our noses.”
“Are you upset that you only made $25,000?” I asked.
“No. It was a fair return for the work I put in. Besides, I agreed 
to that amount and she took the risk. If we had not had the property 
rezoned, she would have lost money. But what I will forever be grateful 
for is that she gave me vision. She taught me to see what I could never 
have seen. She taught me to see the abundance that sits in front of 
each and every one of us, if we will only invest the time to train our 
brain and eyes to see.”
Congratulating him for his new reality, I said, “You gained 
something much more valuable than your $25,000 fee, didn’t you?”
Jeff said, nodding, “Something much more valuable. The city 
planner feels ripped off, but I don’t. I’ve always heard you talk about 
your rich dad’s context and reality, but those words never made much 
sense to me. Now they do. I realized that, from my context, I thought 
in terms of thousands of dollars. I realized that she is richer because 
Chapter Sixteen268
her context is bigger and she thinks in terms of millions. I also realized 
that I still think from the S quadrant, and she thinks from the B and 
I quadrants. Even if she had not paid me anything, what I learned is 
priceless because it has changed my life forever. She has taught me how 
to be a rich man.”
Rezoning a piece of real estate is simply a change of context. 
The transition from poor to rich is also simply a change of context. 
Everyone can do it, if they want to.
Where to Keep Your Money
Most rich people either made their money in real estate, or they 
held much of their wealth in real estate after they made it. Rich dad 
did too. Although he made a lot of money in his businesses and from 
playing the stock market, he parked his wealth in real estate. There are 
many reasons the rich do this:
• Tax laws encourage the rich to invest in real estate.
• There is greater leverage in real estate. A rich person can 
become even richer by investing with their banker’s money.
• The income from real estate is passive income, the least taxed 
of all incomes. If there are capital gains from the sale of a 
property, the capital gains can be deferred for years, allowing 
the investor to reinvest with what normally would  have been 
the government’s tax money.
• Real estate gives the investor much more hands-on control 
over their assets.
• It is a much safer place to park money, if the investor knows   
 how to manage money and property.
The average investor is at tremendous risk by holding the bulk of 
their wealth in paper assets. As stated all throughout this book, what 
happens if a retiree’s paper portfolio is wiped out in a market crash? Is it 
all lost? 
Retire Young Retire Rich269
The answer is no, not if the person knows how to protect their paper 
assets from loss in a bear market. If you only want to hold your wealth 
in paper assets, however, the following chapter is very important.
 

Chapter Seventeen
THE LEVERAGE OF 
PAPER ASSETS271
How to Invest with Less Risk and More Returns
A friend of mine told me he lost over a million dollars in the 
market. He now has to go back to work. When I asked him why he 
lost so much, he said, “What else could I do? I did as my advisors 
advised me to do, which was to ‘buy the dips.’ So I bought the dips, 
and I kept losing. Now that I have lost over a million dollars, those 
same advisors are telling me to sit tight and invest for the long term.  
I don’t have many years left to wait.” 
Investing does not have to be risky. As rich dad said, “While there 
is risk, investing does not have to be risky.” Nor do you have to lose if 
the market changes direction. In fact, if the market starts to go down, 
many sophisticated investors make a lot of money. The following are 
my rich dad’s lessons on how to invest in the stock market and make 
money, regardless if the market is going up or going down.
Keep an Open Context
It is in this section of the book that an open mind and a flexible 
context are important. If you hear your context saying, “That’s 
impossible,” or “You can’t do that,” or “That’s illegal,” or “That’s too 
risky,” or “That would be too hard for me to learn,” simply remind 
yourself to keep your context open so you can hear the content that  
is being delivered.
Chapter Seventeen272
Investing with Insurance in Paper Assets
“Would you drive a car without insurance?” rich dad asked me.
“No,” I replied. “That would be foolish. Why do you ask me  
this question?”
Rich dad smiled and asked, “Would you invest without 
insurance?”
“No,” I replied. “But I’m investing in real estate. I always insure 
my property from losses. In fact, the bank requires I carry insurance  
on all property I own.”
“Good answer,” rich dad replied.
“Why are you asking me these questions about insurance?”  
I asked again. 
“Because it’s time for you to learn how to invest in paper assets, 
such as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds.”
“You can invest with insurance in paper assets?” I asked.  
“You mean you can insure against loss, or minimize your losses?”
Rich dad nodded.
“So investing in paper assets doesn’t have to be risky?” I asked.
“No, it doesn’t,” said rich dad. “Investing doesn’t have to be risky 
at all, if you know what you’re doing.”
“But isn’t investing risky for the average paper-asset investor?”  
I asked. “Isn’t the average investor investing without insurance?”
Rich dad again nodded, looking me in the eye, and said, “That’s 
why I’m teaching you this. I don’t want you to be an average investor. 
The average investor is interested in averages, which is why he or she is 
average. That is why there is a Dow Jones Industrial Average. Averages 
are for average people. That is why there are so many people who listen 
to their financial advisor and get excited when he or she says, ‘The 
market has averaged a 12-percent return for 40 years,’ or ‘This mutual 
fund has an average return of 16 percent over the past five years.’ 
Average investors like averages.”
“What is wrong with averages?” I asked.
Retire Young Retire Rich273
“Nothing really,” said rich dad. “But if you want to be rich, you 
need to be far better than average.”
“So why do averages prevent you from being rich?” I asked.
“Because averages are the summation of wins and losses,”  
said rich dad.
 “For example, while it is true that the stock market has gone up 
on average over the past 40 years, in reality, it has gone up and down.”
“So what?” I said. “Don’t most people know that?”
“Yes, most people do know that,” said rich dad. “But why lose 
when you don’t have to? Average investors make money when the 
market goes up, and lose money when the market goes down. That is 
why they are average. What would your averages be like if you made 
money when the market went up and made money when the market 
went down?”
“That would be good,” I replied. “But what do sophisticated 
investors do?” I asked. “Don’t they use averages?”
“Yes, they do use averages, but they use different averages. The 
point I am making here is that the average investor only knows how 
to make money in an up market. That’s why they’re happy to hear that 
the market has generally averaged up over the years. The sophisticated 
investor is not looking for average information. The sophisticated 
investor does not really care if the market averages up or down because 
they make money in either market condition.”
“You mean they never lose?” I asked.
“No. I did not say that. All investors lose at one time or another. 
What I mean is that the sophisticated investor is capable of winning in 
up markets and down markets. The average investor only has a strategy 
for winning in an up market and takes a beating in a down market. 
Sophisticated investors don’t like to take the financial beatings the 
average investor takes. The sophisticated investor is not always right 
and is capable of losing. The difference is, because of their training, 
skills, tools, and strategies, their losses are generally far less and their 
gains are far greater than the average investor.”
Chapter Seventeen274
Over the years, it seemed strange to me that people would invest 
their hard-earned money, but not invest much time in learning how to 
invest. After all my years with rich dad, I could never understand why 
so many people would rather work hard all their lives than learn to 
have their money work hard for them. And when they did invest their 
hard-earned money in the stock market, they were willing to risk it 
without any insurance from losses. I thought about my poor dad, who 
worked hard and always said, “Investing is risky.” He said that without 
ever doing any research or taking any classes on investing. Rich dad 
had taught me how to invest safely with real estate, and now he was 
teaching me how to invest safely in paper assets.
 “So investing in the stock market does not have to be risky?”  
I asked for further clarification.
“No. Absolutely not,” said rich dad.
“Yet millions of people invest without protection from loss and 
without much education. That makes them risky investors.”
“Extremely risky,” said rich dad. “That is why I asked if your real 
estate investments had insurance. I knew they did because your banker 
requires it. But the average person in the stock market has no insurance. 
Millions and millions of people are investing for their future retirement 
without any catastrophic loss insurance. That is risky. Very risky.”
“So why don’t financial advisors, stockbrokers, and mutual-fund 
salespeople tell them?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” said rich dad. “I’ve often wondered that myself.  
I think the reason is because most financial advisors, stockbrokers,  
and mutual-fund advisors are themselves not really investors, much 
less sophisticated investors. Most financial-services people are salaried 
or commissioned salespeople, working for a paycheck just as their 
clients are working for paychecks.”
“And they give advice to other people, average investors,” I said, 
“people just like themselves.”
Rich dad nodded. “A sophisticated investor can make money in an 
up market or a down market. The average investor occasionally makes 
money in an up market and loses money in a down market. Then after 
Retire Young Retire Rich275
losing a lot of money, the average investor calls his or her advisor and 
asks, ‘What do I do now?’”
“And what does their broker say?” I asked.
“They often say, ‘Sit tight. The market will come back in a few 
months.’ Or they say, ‘Buy more and dollar-cost-average down.’”
“You wouldn’t do that,” I said.
“No,” said rich dad. “I would not do that. But the average  
investor does.” 
“You’re telling me I can invest with less risk and make more money 
in the stock market.”
“That is correct,” said rich dad. “All you have to do is not be an 
average investor.”
Words That Make You Rich
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote that the poor and middle 
class were primarily invested in mutual funds.  
I then wrote that the rich preferred hedge  funds. Again, the power 
of words comes into play. The very word hedge  is an important word 
for the sophisticated investor. There is a world of difference between 
a mutual fund and a hedge  fund. Most of us have heard the phrase, 
“hedge our bets.” The term hedge  in this context is another word 
for insurance . Just as a gardener might grow a hedge  to protect their 
garden from grazing animals, a sophisticated investor will put up a 
hedge to protect their assets.
Simply put, the word hedge  in this context means “protection from 
loss.” Just as you would or should not drive a car without insurance, 
you as an investor should not invest without insurance or a hedge 
against catastrophic loss. As common sense as this is, the average 
investor invests naked , which is another term used by sophisticated 
investors. Naked  in this instance does not refer to the human body. 
It refers to an asset that is exposed without some form of protection 
from losses. A sophisticated investor does not like to invest naked, 
which means “being exposed to unnecessary risk.” A sophisticated 
investor will invest with his or her financial positions covered. Just as 
Chapter Seventeen276
an insurance salesperson would ask, “Are you covered?” sophisticated 
investors will also ask themselves the same question. In general, the 
average investor and mutual-fund investor is investing naked because 
they are not covered against losses.
Not Protecting Your Assets Is Risky
Some time ago, I was one of the keynote speakers at a conference 
for investors. The main speaker was a very famous television 
personality who reports on one of the bigger financial television 
networks. Her talk was informative, and I learned a lot. Yet I found it 
interesting to hear her say that she only invests in mutual funds.
Suddenly, a participant raised his hand and said, “Don’t you feel 
guilty that you are responsible for the billions of dollars your viewers 
have lost in the stock market?” His tone was angry, and as he spoke, 
I could sense that many investors were in agreement with him. It 
seemed that many investors had come to this conference, not to learn 
about what to invest their money in, but to find out what happened to 
the money they had lost.
“Why should I feel guilty?” she replied. “My job is to give you 
information, and I do give you a lot of information. I did not give you 
investment advice. I only gave you market information. Why do you 
say I should feel guilty?”
 “Because you were a cheerleader during this bull-market boom,” 
said the angry participant. “Because of you, I kept investing and now 
I’ve lost everything.”
“I wasn’t cheerleading,” she said. “I was just giving you information in 
a good market, just as I am giving you information in a bad market today.”
For the next five minutes, the anger in the room flared. Some 
people agreed with the angry participant, and others were taking the 
side of the female reporter. Finally things calmed down. The television 
reporter asked for more questions. A hand shot up and asked her, 
“Why didn’t you tell your audience about minimizing their risk with 
options?” he asked. This participant was not angry. He sounded more 
curious and wanted to let the audience know that they could minimize 
their risk exposure by using options.
Retire Young Retire Rich277
“Options?” she said. “Why would I tell them about options?”
“As a hedge against loss in a bear market,” he said.
“Oh, I would never do that,” she replied. “Options are too risky. 
Any other questions?” she asked, signaling the person who asked about 
options to sit down.
I could not believe what I was hearing. This TV personality is one 
of the most respected people in financial journalism. She influences 
millions of people’s lives. Many people look to her for investment 
advice, and now she was saying, “Options are risky.” To me, not 
protecting your assets is risky. To me, being financially ignorant is 
risky. Knowing how to use options to protect your paper assets is easy 
and not that hard to do. In fact, if you have a good stockbroker, the 
process is pretty easy. A kid could do it. All you have to do is learn the 
definitions of a few new words, find a good broker, and start small to 
gain some experience. Instead, I watched many of the thousand people 
in the room nod, agreeing that investing with options is risky.
As I sat there, watching her faithful followers nodding with her in 
agreement that options are risky, my mind drifted back to rich dad’s 
earlier lessons on investing in paper assets. I could hear him saying, 
“Hundreds of years ago in ancient Japan, Japanese farmers began using 
options to protect the price of their rice crops.”
“Hundreds of years ago?” I asked. “Hundreds of years ago they 
were using options as hedges against loss?”
Rich dad nodded, “Yes, hundreds of years ago. Beginning in  
the Agrarian Age, smart businesspeople have been using options to 
protect their businesses from losses. Smart businesspeople continue  
to do so today.”
My mind returned to the room in Chicago where this TV 
journalist was speaking. I wondered to myself, “If smart businesspeople 
have been using options for years, why is this very influential person 
misinforming her viewers?” I then asked myself, “What is more 
risky—buying a stock or mutual fund and watching it drop 40 to 60 
percent, even to 90 percent in value, and not protecting yourself?  
My banker requires me to have insurance on my real estate. Why doesn’t 
Chapter Seventeen278
the paper-asset industry require all investors to buy insurance on their 
paper assets, assets that millions of people are counting on for their old 
age?” To this day, I do not have an answer to those questions. 
As stated earlier, if your house burns down, it can be replaced in 
less than a year and paid for by your insurance company. But if your 
retirement plan crashes with the stock market after you have retired, 
what will you do then? Buy, hold, and pray again? Hope for another 
bull market? So I continue to wonder why bankers require investors to 
invest with insurance, yet the paper-asset industry doesn’t. I continue to 
wonder why professional investors invest with insurance, yet the average 
investor, who is counting on the stock market for their financial security 
once their working days are over, invests naked and uncovered.
Vocabulary of Insurance
If you want to retire young and retire rich, it is important that 
you invest some time learning how to protect your assets, especially 
if you plan on holding your wealth in paper assets. You do that by 
learning and understanding what my rich dad called “the language of a 
sophisticated investor.” I call it the vocabulary of insurance.
Before getting into those words, I believe it’s important to review a 
few other words. The following are other words that need to be defined 
before getting into the words of insurance:
• Investor vs. Trader  
Most people who think they are investors are really traders. 
Just as most people think their liabilities are assets, many 
investors are traders rather than investors. One more point. 
Many people who think they are investors are really savers. 
That is why most people who have 401(k) retirement plans, 
or IRA, Keogh plans, often say, “I am saving for retirement.” 
A saver simply puts money into an account and does nothing 
else. An investor is a person who actively manages his or her 
own portfolio or account.
Retire Young Retire Rich279
 So what is the difference between an investor and a trader? An 
investor buys to hold. A trader buys to sell. When a person 
says, “I bought this stock or piece of real estate because I know 
the price is going up,” I know this person is really a trader. In 
other words, they are buying only to trade, not to use. That 
is why I say most people are traders rather than investors. A 
trader generally wants the price of their asset to move up so 
they can sell it for a profit. An investor wants the investment to 
return their money as quickly as possible, all the while holding 
on to the asset. Rich dad said, “An investor buys a cow for milk 
and for calves. A trader buys a cow to slaughter.”
 If you want to be successful in the world of investing, 
regardless if it is in paper assets, businesses, or real estate, you 
need to be both an investor and a trader. An investor knows 
what to analyze and how to manage investments. A trader 
knows how and when to buy and sell. An investor usually 
wants cash flow from the asset. The trader wants to realize a 
capital gain from buying low and selling high.
• Fundamental investor vs. T echnical investor
 A fundamental investor looks at the financial statement of a 
company or property. A fundamental investor is often concerned 
with earnings, the management team, and the long-term 
potential of the business. A pure technical investor does not care 
about the company’s fundamentals. They don’t even care if the 
company is profitable or well run. The technical investor only 
cares about the market’s sentiment at that moment. While a 
fundamental investor looks at financial statements, a technical 
investor would rather look at historic charts that reflect the 
market’s sentiment. (Later in this chapter there will be some 
charts to look at.)
Chapter Seventeen280
 A technical investor can be a good technical investor and lose 
money simply because he lacks proper fundamentals. Many 
“day traders” eventually lose or go broke because they have poor 
personal money-management fundamentals. 
 The same is true for fundamental investors. Many fundamental 
investors wonder why they do not make money, or lose money, 
even though they are investing in good, solid, profitable 
companies. Many fundamental investors lose, even though they 
invest with good fundamentals, because they lack the knowledge 
of technical trading.
 This reality is why rich dad wanted his son and me to be 
qualified, or sophisticated, investors with both good fundamental 
skills and good technical skills.
• Average investor vs. Sophisticated investor
 The average investor barely knows what a financial statement 
is. The average investor is better off investing for the long term, 
de-worsifying their portfolio, investing in mutual funds, and 
then buying, holding, and praying. 
 The sophisticated investor is someone who has money and 
understands both fundamental investment techniques as well 
as technical trading techniques.
Words That Help You Win in Any Market
If you want to retire young and retire rich, protecting or insuring 
your assets from catastrophic loss is vital. The average investor in 
paper assets never feels secure. That is why the average investor feels 
that investing is risky and, for them, it is. Because they feel insecure, 
they entrust their money to a fund manager, or their brother who is 
a stockbroker, or a financial planner, hoping and praying that this 
person will protect them from market disasters. The problem is, the 
average mutual-fund manager or stockbroker cannot protect them 
Retire Young Retire Rich281
from a crash, nor can they help them make money in a flat market that 
is moving sideways.
The way to win and protect your assets in any market is to learn 
and truly understand the vocabulary of the fundamental and technical 
investor, especially in paper assets. It is easy to do if you will invest 
a little time. Just as a banker will ask to see your financial statement 
before giving you a loan (which is fundamental) and require you to 
have property, title, and mortgage insurance on a real estate investment 
(which is to insure the technical or catastrophic risk), you too should 
require the same of yourself if you want to invest in paper assets. The 
way you do that is to begin understanding the words of insurance 
when investing in paper assets. A few of these words are:
1. T rends
2. Moving averages
3. Stop orders
4. Call options
5. Put options
6. Straddles or collars
7. Shorts
The average investor may have heard some of these terms but 
probably does not understand them or has never used them. Many 
average investors simply discount these very important words by 
saying, “It’s too risky.” Saying something is risky may also be saying, 
“I’m just too lazy to study the subject.”
What You Must Know
If you want to retain your wealth in paper assets, you must know 
how to insure your paper assets against market crashes. The following 
is a sampling of what you must know. Again, it begins with words.
Chapter Seventeen282
1. Trends  
Every sophisticated investor must understand trends. There is 
a saying that all sophisticated investors say and that is, “The 
trend is your friend.” Please remember and use that saying.
 So what is a trend? The best way to explain it is by telling you 
a story. When I was a teenager growing up in Hawaii, most of 
my friends were training to be big wave surfers. Every winter 
when the large swells rolled in from the north, we would 
enter the water to prove our courage and improve our skills. 
One year, a new student arrived from the mainland. He was a 
pretty good surfer in the small summer swells. When winter 
arrived, he ventured into the water thinking nothing had 
changed except the height of the waves. On his first ride on 
a large wave, he lost control and wiped out at the bottom of 
the wave. The huge wave curled over him and we did not see 
him for a long time. Finally, he popped up some distance from 
us, coughing and swimming as hard as he could. Those of us 
who were surfing with him could not believe what we saw. We 
could not believe he was trying to swim against the current. 
One of us finally said, “Oh no. I can’t believe he’s trying to 
swim against the current. No one is that strong a swimmer.”
 When large waves hit the shore, all that water must find a way 
back out to sea. It is this movement of water out to sea that 
causes a rip current. It is like a river of water moving parallel 
to the beach and then out to sea. For those of us raised in the 
islands, we know to simply relax and let the current take us 
out to deeper water. Once the current has dissipated, we know 
to simply swim or body surf in through a safer channel. This 
new friend did not know how powerful a rip current could 
be. Instead of going with the flow, he tried to fight it, became 
exhausted, and nearly drowned. The same thing happens with 
new investors.
Retire Young Retire Rich283
 Investment cycles come in waves, as do ocean waves. They also 
change with the seasons. Surfers learn to respect the change 
in the power of the waves and water with each change of 
season. Sophisticated investors do the same thing. That is why 
sophisticated investors say, “The trend is your friend.” Just as 
experienced surfers learn not to fight the waves or currents, 
sophisticated investors go with the trends, changing strategies 
when appropriate, or standing on the sideline if things are too 
choppy. Average investors continue to buy and hold, buy the 
dips, or call and ask their brokers, “Is this the bottom?” as they 
get pounded.
Three Basic Trends
There are three basic trends that affect paper assets as well as all 
other investment products. One is an up-trending market, often called 
a bull market. The second trend is a market heading down, and that 
is called a bear market. The third trend is a sideways-trending market, 
which is a market that is not going up and not going down. The 
sophisticated investor uses different strategies for the different trends. 
The average investor has only one strategy and tries to use it on three 
different trends. That is why they ultimately lose. The idea of investing 
for the long term is basically a good idea, but investing for the long 
term with only one strategy is a loser’s way of investing.
Even animals are aware that there are changes of seasons. When 
the first chills of winter arrive with the fall season, most animals know 
they need to prepare for the change that winter brings. The same is 
true for sophisticated investors. It is only the average investor who 
believes the words of their financial advisors, “Invest for the long term. 
Buy and hold even though the market goes down.” If animals are 
smart enough to know that things change, why aren’t humans?
Chapter Seventeen284
2. Moving Averages
 T rends are caused by buyers and sellers. If there are more buyers, 
then the trend is up. If there are more sellers, then the trend is 
down. An average investor takes comfort when their financial 
advisor says to him, “The market has gone up over the last 40 
years.” The sophisticated investor is not watching a long-term 
average, but a moving average. Just as a surfer watches the daily 
rise and fall of the tides, the sophisticated investor watches the ebb 
and flow of money in and out of the market. The sophisticated 
investor watches these charts because these charts tell them when 
to change strategy.
 Fundamental investors look at financial statements and 
management teams. A technical investor looks at charts such  
as the following moving-average charts.
          
Point one is an up trend.Bull market
Retire Young Retire Rich285
 Point two is a down trend.
Point three is a sidways-moving trend.Bear market
Chapter Seventeen286
How Do You Know if the Trend Is Changing?
Does the market give you signs that it is about to change? The 
answer is yes. It is not an exact science, but it sure beats guessing, 
going on hunches, and investing on hot tips.
Most of us know that meteorologists can predict a hurricane. 
Although predicting the weather is not an exact science, nonetheless 
today we are given ample warning if a large storm is brewing. A 
technical trader can do almost the same thing. That means, while 
the average investor is holding and praying the market stays up, the 
professional investors are selling before the storm hits.
There are many signs a technical trader looks for. The following 
charts show one of the telltale patterns a technical investor watches for.
Technical traders call this chart pattern a double top. When 
technical investors see this pattern, they become cautious and begin 
to change investment strategies, or get out of the market entirely. If 
you notice, the price of the stock tumbled down sharply right after a 
double top.
Double Top
Retire Young Retire Rich287
A similar pattern occurs at the bottom of the market. This pattern 
is called a double bottom. When technical investors see this pattern 
emerging, they again change strategies or begin to buy stocks while 
average investors have given up hope and are selling.
There are many different types of patterns that technical investors 
look for. Nor are these patterns absolutes or guarantees. Yet they do 
give the sophisticated investor a significant advantage over the average 
investor who is clueless about these market signals. One big advantage 
a technical investor has is that they have the time to protect their asset 
prices with insurance. The average investor sits there fully exposed, 
uninsured, and unprotected. Millions of investors have their financial 
future sitting at risk, hoping and praying their financial advisor’s advice 
will protect them from the storms that return on a regular basis to any 
financial market.
Every time I hear the so-called financial experts advising, “Invest 
for the long term. Don’t panic. Just sit tight. Always remember that 
the market on average has gone up over the past 40 years,” I cringe. Double Bottom
Chapter Seventeen288
When I hear these experts saying such words, I shake my head and 
feel badly for those millions of people who listen to such experts and 
entrust their financial future to them. Investing does not have to be 
risky, if you know what you’re doing.
T ools of the Sophisticated Investor
The average investor only has two choices once the market changes 
directions. They can hold and lose, or sell and lose. A sophisticated 
investor has choices other than buying and losing or selling and losing.
The following are some of the mental tools that sophisticated 
investors use to protect their assets and make money in up and down 
markets. These are the tools that help them make money and protect 
their money when the market goes down.
3. Stop Orders
 A sophisticated investor may call their broker and request a stop 
order if he or she suspects the price of their stock may go down, 
especially if the market trend is down. The average investor does 
nothing. If the price of their stock goes down, they just watch it 
go down. Not knowing what to do, their “buy, hold, and pray” 
strategy turns to a “buy, hold, and lose” strategy.
 This is how a stop order works. Let’s say your stock is at $50 
today, and the charts tell you that the market is trending down. 
All you have to do is call your broker and put in a stop order 
at, let’s say, $48. If the stock price begins to drop to, let’s say, 
$30 because more sellers have entered the market, your stop 
order becomes a market order and the stock is sold at $48. 
Your losses are limited to $2. The average investor would lose 
$18 and still be clinging to the stock.
 Although stop orders are often used as “insurance” by 
investors, they are not always used by very sophisticated 
investors. Often the share prices tend to gap on the opening 
transaction. Sophisticated investors already have the news and 
Retire Young Retire Rich289
have decided whether to sell their shares or cancel the stop 
limit order. 
 The following are two reasons why stop orders might not 
succeed in a falling or volatile market:
• The first reason a professional investor might not use a stop 
order is because the trend is heading down too fast. Sometimes 
in a rapidly falling market, the stop order can be passed by 
without being executed. For example, let’s say the price of 
the stock is at $50. Since the trend is down, the investor puts 
in a stop order at $48. That means if the price drops to $48, 
the stock is automatically sold. But if the market should drop 
rapidly, it is possible that the $48 price can be “gapped” or 
skipped. That’s because so many people are selling that there 
are no buyers at $48, so the stop is passed, or gapped. If the 
price stops at $40 because a few buyers step forward, the best 
the investor can do is to hold on at $40 or sell at $40. Their 
stop was passed over.
• Another reason a stop may not be used by a professional 
investor is because they are not certain of the trend of the 
market. For example, let’s say again that the stock is at $50 and 
a stop is put in at $48. As expected, the stock drops to $47, so 
the stock is sold at $48. The investor feels relieved until he or 
she realizes the market has suddenly trended up and the price 
of their stock is now $65. Not only have they lost $2 a share. 
They have lost out on a $17 move up.
Making a Killing or Being Killed
We have often heard someone say, “I am making a killing in the 
market.” During the dotcom boom and bust, there were many people 
who went into the mania with the idea of making a killing. Instead, 
they were the ones that were killed. Many people laugh and chuckle at 
such mania, saying, “How could people have been so foolish?” What 
Chapter Seventeen290
many people do not hear about are the people that did make a killing 
on the way up and on the way down.
A friend of mine made a fortune buying early in the dotcom IPO 
craze. He “made a killing,” as they say. He also made a killing on the 
way down. Just before the top in late 1999, he sold every share of 
dotcom stock he owned. Then as the top neared, he began selectively 
shorting (explained below) some of the same dotcom company stocks 
that made him rich on the way up. Three of those companies fell so 
far that they went into bankruptcy. So he made a fortune on the way 
up, and he made an even bigger fortune on the way down. Why? The 
reason he made more of a fortune on the way down was because he did 
not use any of his own money and he has not paid taxes on the money 
he got from shorting the stocks of companies that went bankrupt.
When I asked him why, he said, “I shorted shares at the top, which 
means I borrowed them. Then the companies went down and went 
bankrupt. I have yet to pay taxes because there has been no closing 
transaction, so I owe no tax. All I did was sell shares of stock I did not 
own or I borrowed, and now I await the time when I can buy them 
back and return them to the person I borrowed them from.” Today, 
he has nearly $875,000 in money he made by shorting a few stocks, 
sitting in a tax-free municipal bond fund, collecting tax-free interest 
from money he received by selling stocks he did not own. He says, 
“I’m waiting for the opportunity to buy those shares back, but until 
then, I collect the interest on tax-free capital-gains money.”
 If you do not understand this transaction, do not worry. Most 
people do not. If you would like to understand it better, contact a 
stockbroker or your accountant and ask them if they can better explain 
it to you.
The point is, if you want to make a killing on the way up, you also 
need to know how to make a killing on the way down. If you don’t, 
then you are often the one being killed by the people making a killing.
There is a lot more to learn about using professional trading tools 
such as stops. There is also a lot more to investing with these tools than 
just asking your broker to put in a sell stop or a buy stop, which is a 
stop in the other direction. Sophisticated investors need to have many 
Retire Young Retire Rich291
more tools than average investors. If they don’t, they too will get killed 
while their peers are making a killing.
This unfair advantage that sophisticated investors have is the 
reason why, when I am asked, “What advice would you give to the 
average investor?” my answer is, “Don’t be average.” I say that because 
your financial future and your financial security are too important to 
just be average.
A word of caution and warning: This is not a book on technical 
trading. The above example on a stop is a very simple explanation. A 
sophisticated investor knows how and when to use a short because 
there are times when stops work well and times when they do not 
work at all. Before running out to use any of these technical processes, 
please read, ask, attend classes, and gain experience before attempting 
to use any of the techniques I have described and will be describing.
The primary reason I list a few of these techniques is to let people 
who think that investing is risky know that investing does not have to 
be risky. It is still up to the individual to seek further knowledge if they 
want to use these techniques.
 
4. Call Options
 Another word for options is insurance . Simply put, a call option 
gives the owner of the option the right to buy shares of stock at 
a certain price per share over a predetermined period of time. A 
call option is an insurance policy, protecting the investor from 
missing out on a sudden increase in the price of a stock. For 
example, let’s say the trends and moving-average charts indicate 
that more buyers are entering the market, so prices are moving 
up. The investor wants to insure he or she can buy the stock at 
a better price in case the stock goes up in value. Let’s use as an 
example a stock with a price of $50 per share today. The investor 
calls his broker and says he wants to buy a call option to buy 
100 shares of stock at $50 per share. He might pay $1 per share 
for that call option, costing him $100 (each option covers 100 
shares). He’s protecting himself from a sudden upside move.
Chapter Seventeen292
 Three weeks later, the investor returns from a fishing trip and 
finds out that the stock has risen to $60 per share. The call option 
technically allows the investor to buy 100 shares of the stock at 
$50 per share. He could then, if he chooses, sell the same 100 
shares at $60 per share.
 Otherwise, if the stock had stayed at a market price of $50 
per share or below, the option would expire worthless, or as 
sophisticated investors say, “out of the money.”
 In the example of the stock rising to $60 per share, the average 
investor might then exercise his right to buy 100 shares at $50 per 
share for $5,000 and simultaneously sell 100 shares for $6,000, 
realizing a gain of $900 ($6,000 less the $5,000 less the $100 cost 
of the option). On the other hand, a sophisticated investor would 
just choose to sell his option for $10 per share, or $1,000 for the 
unit of 100 shares, realizing a gain of $900 ($1,000 less the $100 
cost of the option).
 When you examine the transaction, the average investor put up 
$5,000 to make $900. The sophisticated investor put up $100 to 
make the same $900 gain. In this oversimplified example, which 
investor made more money with his money?
 The answer I would give is, “The investor who bought and sold 
options,” or the sophisticated investor. The average investor put 
up $5,000 to make $900, or an 18-percent return in a month. 
The sophisticated investor put up $100 and made $900 in less 
than a month for a 900-percent return.
 Again, this is an oversimplified example and I strongly 
recommend you study more, gain some experience, and find a 
competent stockbroker to assist you through this learning process.
 This example illustrates why rich dad did not want to own much, 
but instead sought only to control. Options give you control over 
the buy-and-sell process. It also illustrates one example on how 
leverage can be created in paper assets and how leverage can be 
Retire Young Retire Rich293
used with less risk and higher returns if you know what you are 
doing. In this example, the sophisticated investor only put at risk 
$1 per option. The average investor put up $50 per share. When 
you go back to the discussion on the velocity of money, which 
investor’s money is moving faster? Which investor can become 
richer faster?
Rich People Don’t Like to Own Things
You may have noticed something with this last example. You may 
have noticed that you do not necessarily have to own the stock in 
order to own an option. This often-overlooked detail can have large 
financial consequences if you understand it.
The point is, my rich dad never wanted to own anything. My poor 
dad did. My poor dad often said, “This house is in my name.” “My car 
is in my name.” My rich dad said, “You don’t want to own anything. 
All you want to do is control it.” Options are another example of this 
way of thinking. My poor dad wanted to own the stock. My rich dad 
only wanted to own the option to buy or sell the stock. Today, I notice 
many people take pride in owning stock when, in many ways, there 
is far better leverage in buying and selling options. In other words, it 
may take far less money to make a lot of money trading options rather 
than buying shares of stocks.
5. Put Options
 In the previous example, you saw how call options are used to 
make money in an up-trending or bull market. When the trend 
of the market is down, the sophisticated investor will use put 
options not only to make money, but also to protect the value of 
her stock in case prices begin to fall.
 For example, the stock price is $50. The market moves down, 
and the price of the stock falls to $40. The average investor has 
lost $10 per share. If she had 100 shares, she lost $1,000 on 
paper. The point here is that the investor has only lost on paper, 
Chapter Seventeen294
but not in reality. If she sold at $40 per share, then she would 
have lost. This idea that the loss is only a paper loss is why so 
many losing investors suddenly say, “I’m in for the long haul.” 
Those words usually mean this investor will now wait until 
that stock goes back up to $50, which may happen overnight, 
over years, or never. This is the “buy, hold, and lose” strategy of 
someone who is the eternal optimist or someone who hates to 
admit they made a mistake and lost.
 The sophisticated investor would invest differently. Instead of 
sitting there worrying about the price of her stock falling, this 
investor would have her broker put in a stop order or buy a put 
option. Again, there are different reasons for using a stop and 
for using a put option, and those reasons are beyond the scope 
of this book. The point here is that the sophisticated investor 
will do something in case the market changes directions and 
begins to trend down.
 Instead of praying the market does not go down, let’s say the 
sophisticated investor buys a put option for $1 per share for the 
right to sell her shares at $50 per share. The put would cost her 
$100, or $1 per share for 100 shares. The market goes down as 
more sellers enter the market and the price of the stock drops 
to $40 per share. The sophisticated investor is happy because 
she has just protected her position at the share price of $50. 
What she continues to lose in the long stock position as the 
shares drop under $50 she recaptures in the increasing value 
of the put. The investor without a put loses dollar for dollar as 
the share price drops. The sophisticated, or hedged, investor 
is really flat. The loss on the stock has been recaptured with a 
gain in the put.
 How does the sophisticated investor make money with a put 
when the average investor lost? The sophisticated investor 
could exercise her put, or right to sell 100 shares at $50 per 
share, and receive $5,000. If she chooses, she could then go to 
Retire Young Retire Rich295
the market and buy 100 shares at $40 a share for $4,000. The 
net result is, she has her 100 shares of stock and an extra $900 
($1,000 less the cost of the put). (Keep in mind that there are 
many security rules and regulations that must be followed and 
considered.)
 The average investor, with no put option, only has his or her 
shares, which are now worth less. The average investor still has 
not gotten any of his or her money back.
 If this is confusing to you, do not worry. It is confusing to most 
people the first time. It is important to remember about the 
need to think in opposites. For many people, learning to use 
options is much like learning how to eat with your left hand 
after you have spent years eating with your right hand. It can 
be done. It just takes a little practice. The point to remember 
is that the process of using options to protect your assets as 
well as make money in up or down markets is not a complex 
process. Most people can learn it if they give themselves a little 
time to understand it. 
 It is important to remember that investing does not have to 
be risky if you have the right advice and right advisors. You 
don’t have to spend your life worrying about your paper-
asset portfolio being wiped out by a market crash. Instead of 
worrying about market crashes, you can prepare to become 
richer and richer the more the market goes up, down, and 
sideways. What is important to note is that the average investor 
who lost money is often sitting, waiting, and listening to their 
financial advisor’s advice of, “Hold on and invest for the long 
term.” They do that because they only have a strategy for only 
one market trend. As you now know, there are three different 
market trends.
Chapter Seventeen296
A Sophisticated Investor May Not Buy Stocks
There are sophisticated investors who never buy or sell stocks. They 
trade only in options. When I asked one of my option-trader friends 
why he only invested in options rather than stocks, he said, “Investing 
in stocks is too slow. I can make much more money with less money 
investing in options. I can also make more money in less time. 
Investing in stocks and hoping to make money is like sitting around 
waiting for the paint to dry.”
6. Straddles or collars
 Straddles or collars are the ultimate insurance protection. In 
overly simple terms, a straddle or collar is placing a put and a 
call around a price position. For example, if the price of the 
investor’s stock is $50 per share, a sophisticated investor may 
have a call option placed at $52 per share and a put option 
in place at $48 per share. If the market suddenly goes up to 
$62 per share, the investor has the right to still buy his or her 
shares at $52. If the market goes down to $42, the investor has 
the right to sell his or her shares at $48, minimizing the loss. 
If the stock’s market price is at $42 and the investor has a put 
option, which is the option to sell a stock at $48, that option 
suddenly becomes very valuable—in some cases, much more 
valuable than the stock itself. The point is, collars or straddles 
are used to protect both the up- and the downside risks and 
opportunities. It can be an ultra-conservative strategy, if you 
know what you are doing.
 Again, this is not meant to be a book on options trading. 
Obviously, I have oversimplified the process for the sole 
purpose of promoting a basic understanding of options. Also, 
there are much more sophisticated strategies that are used to 
protect assets and increase returns.
Retire Young Retire Rich297
7. Shorts
 When I was a kid, I was told not to touch or use things that did 
not belong to me. That is not true in the stock market. When 
someone shorts a stock, that literally means they are selling 
something they do not own. If my mom knew I was doing this, 
she would have a strong and long discussion with me. But then 
again, my mom was not an investor.
 First of all, a short is not an option. When someone says, “I am 
shorting this stock,” they are trading in stocks, not options. A 
sophisticated investor knows the differences between a short 
and options and knows when to use them and when not to 
use them. Again, knowing when and when not to use them is 
beyond the scope of this book.
 Why short a stock? Generally, if the investor feels the price 
of a stock is too high and the market is trending down, a 
sophisticated investor may find it profitable to begin to use 
shorts to make money. Shorting a stock is simply borrowing 
someone else’s stocks, selling them into the market, and putting 
the money into your pocket. If and when the market price of the 
stock comes down, the investor buys the stock back and returns 
it to the person they borrowed the stocks from.
 For example, let’s say XYZ Corporation’s stock price is $50 and 
the market is trending down. The following is a sequence of 
events involved in shorting a stock:
• The investor calls his or her stockbroker and asks to short 
100 shares of XYZ stock.
• The broker then borrows 100 shares from another client’s 
account and sells the 100 shares for $5,000.
• The broker then deposits the $5,000 into the account of 
the investor (who did not own the stock).
• In the account where the stock was borrowed from, there is 
an IOU for 100 shares of stock, not for $5,000.
Chapter Seventeen298
• Over time, the stock price of XYZ drops to $40 a share.
• The investor who borrowed the shares calls the stockbroker 
up and says, “Buy me 100 shares of XYZ at $40.”
• The broker buys the 100 shares of stock at $40 and returns 
the initial 100 shares to the account that loaned the shares 
to the investor.
• The stockbroker pays for the 100 shares from the $5,000 
in the investor’s account. The $5,000 has come from the 
original sale of the 100 shares of stock at $50.
• The investor has realized a $1,000 profit (less fees, 
commissions, and taxes) by selling shares of stock they did 
not own. The investor made money without any money. 
That is, in simplified terms, the process of shorting a stock.
 A few more points:
 Point #1
 The moment the investor bought the shares at $40 and 
returned the 100 shares to the original investor, the shorting 
investor is said to have “covered their short position.” Those are 
very important words to remember.
 Point #2
 As you can tell, there is tremendous risk in shorting a stock. A 
person can lose a lot of money shorting a stock if the market 
trends up and the stock price goes up. In this example, this 
same investor would have lost $1,000 if the stock price went to 
$60. But as rich dad often said, “Just because there is risk, does 
not mean it has to be risky.” There are sophisticated investors 
who will straddle a short by buying a call option for $51. If 
the trend did turn up and the stock price went to $60, the 
investor would pay $51 per share instead of $60 a share, again 
minimizing their exposure.
 
Retire Young Retire Rich299
 Point #3 
 You may have noticed that I made reference to the market 
trends. Remember the saying, “The trend is your friend.” Don’t 
be like my friend who tried to swim against the rip current. 
More than knowing the definition of words such as shorts, 
straddles, and call options, it is important to know how they 
are related to one another. In other words, using a short is 
pretty safe in a down-trending market, and much more risky in 
an up-trending or sideways-moving market.
 Point #4
 If you have no idea what has just been covered, do not worry. 
 It only takes a little time and a little practice to make these 
words a part of your vocabulary if you want to. The main point 
of all this is that investing does not have to be risky, if you are 
willing to invest a little time to increase your education, as 
you are doing now. Once you learn to minimize risk, you can 
greatly increase your returns because you are not doing what 
average investors do.
 
Why It Does Not Take Money to Make Money
People often ask me, “Doesn’t it take money to make money?” 
If you understood the process of shorting a stock, you will know the 
answer to that question. When a person shorts a stock, they receive 
money for selling something they do not own. So it really does not 
take money to make money. Yet, the real answer to the question, 
“Doesn’t it take money to make money?” is, “It depends upon who is 
doing the investing.”
Rich dad said, “The less financially intelligent you are, the more 
money it takes to make a little money. If you are financially intelligent, 
it doesn’t take any money to make a lot of money.” The following 
example further illustrates this point and also illustrates the value of 
having a strong and rich financial vocabulary.
Chapter Seventeen300
A few months ago, I called my stockbroker and said, “Write a 
naked put option on XYZ. Write it for ten contracts.”
My broker asked me a few more questions and then said, “It’s 
done.” What he asked me was the time horizon for the option and 
other questions that are again outside the realm of this book.
What I had just done was sell put options, not buy them. This is 
an important point. The reason it is important is because, up to now, 
options have been used as insurance policies, which is why most people 
buy options. When you use the words, “write an option,” it means you 
are selling the option, not buying it. The very rich sell options just as the 
very rich sell shares of stock, not buy them. Bill Gates became the richest 
man in the world by selling shares of Microsoft, not by buying shares 
of Microsoft. The same is true in the world of options—only it is much 
faster, easier, and can be more profitable—again, if you know what you 
are doing.
When I said to my broker, “Write a naked put option,” I was saying, 
“I want to sell options on stock I do not own.” In this case, they are put 
options and I wanted ten contracts, which means 1,000 shares, since a 
contract is 100 options.
My broker called back later that day and said, “You got $5.”
I said, “Thank you,” and the transaction was over for the time being. 
I did not have to watch the stock or the market and was free to go about 
doing what I wanted to do. When he said he “got” me $5, that meant 
he put 15,000 into my account that day. In other words, it took me less 
than five minutes to make $5,000. On top of that, I did not put up any 
money nor did I sell anything tangible. In many ways, I sold nothing and 
made $5,000 in less than five minutes. (As a point of clarification, while 
I did not put up any money or sell anything tangible, I have other assets 
in my brokerage account that act as collateral on the transaction, which 
allows me to work with my broker in this way.)
A few weeks later, he called back and said, “It expired out of  
the money.”
“That’s great,” I replied. “By the way, when are we going to play golf?”
Retire Young Retire Rich301
The Power of Words
First of all, I do not write about this transaction to brag. I write 
about this one actual transaction only to illustrate the power of words. 
Those words are more than words to me. They are real and alive in my 
brain. Those words are tools that make me rich, tools that allow me to 
make money without any money. As rich dad always said, “There are 
words that make you rich, and words that make you poor.”
When I said to my broker, “Write a naked put option on XYZ,” 
I was saying, “Sell to someone the right to sell me the stock they own 
for a certain price.” On that day, XYZ was selling for around $45 per 
share. My put option assured the person buying the put option that 
I would buy his stock at $40 per share. In other words, I was selling 
insurance to the owner of XYZ stock. If the stock price had fallen to 
$40 per share and the put had been exercised, I would have bought it 
at that price, protecting him from further losses.
When my broker called me back and said, “You got $5,” he meant 
I got $5 per share covered by the put option. In the vocabulary of 
options traders, writing means selling. It is also the same word used in 
the insurance industry. Many of us have had an insurance salesperson 
say, “I am writing you a life-insurance policy with a death benefit of 
$100,000.” Another word the insurance industry uses is underwriting, 
which means they are guaranteeing you something for a price. In other 
words, writing means selling in the world of insurance and in the 
world of options. In this case, I was underwriting the investor’s  
$45 risk exposure for $5 a share. I was guaranteeing the investor that  
I would buy their stock for $40 if the price went down that low. 
In this case, I became the insurance company, which is why I was 
“writing a naked put option.” I was insuring something I did not own, 
which is what insurance companies do.
A Loser’s Context
I can hear some of your mind’s context saying, “But that is so risky. 
What if the stock market crashes? What if you have to buy the shares 
at $40?” As stated all throughout this book, a person needs to keep 
Chapter Seventeen302
their context open if they want to learn anything. Or as rich dad said, 
“Just because there is risk does not mean it has to be risky.”
I saved this section for the end of this book because I wanted 
to make sure your context was somewhat prepared to receive this 
information. I have never written about this before because I never 
wrote about the importance of context before. For most people, their 
context is not able to grasp, much less accept, what I am about to 
explain. If you have stuck with me this long I say, “Congratulations.” 
When I speak to some of my friends or others with a loser’s context, 
which is a context that is driven by the fear of losing, the noise from 
their fear is so loud, they cannot hear what I am saying or about to say. 
Their fear of risk and losing kicks in and their minds start chattering 
away, saying, “That’s too risky. Don’t tell me any more. I can’t do that.” 
So thank you for hanging in for all this time.
In that five-minute transaction, I basically agreed to buy 1,000 
shares of XYZ stock for $40 per share if the investor who held the stock 
would pay me a $5 per share premium. The money, or $5,000, was 
deposited into my account. A few weeks later, the price of the stock was 
around $43 and so the option or insurance policy expired worthless, 
or “out of the money” as they say. The $5,000 was mine to keep—less 
commissions, fees, and taxes. The point I want to emphasize is that it 
took less than five minutes, I sold nothing and did nothing after that, 
meaning I did not have to sit in front of a computer screen watching the 
ups and downs of the market. I still made $5,000.
There are many people who do not make $5,000 a month and, if 
they do, they pay far more in taxes than I did on the same amount of 
money. A worker would pay self-employment tax on that $5,000 and I 
would not, because it was not the same kind of income. A worker earns 
$5,000 in ordinary income and I earned $5,000 in portfolio income.
Making Money Out of Thin Air
Before going further, it is important for you to ponder how the 
$5,000 was made, because it was made out of thin air. When you inspect 
this transaction, you will begin to realize that I made the money by selling 
Retire Young Retire Rich303
something I did not own. I also made the money by selling something 
that did not exist until I decided it existed. The transaction was like 
making money out of thin air. If you can truly understand what went 
on in this transaction, physically as well as mentally, you can begin to 
understand the power of your mind to create money out of nothing. That 
ability is often called “the power of alchemy.” 
Now you may further understand why rich dad had me work for free 
when I was a kid. He wanted to train me to think about creating money 
rather than working for money. He wanted me to develop a different 
context, a context not dependent upon hard work to become rich.
Making Losers Happy
Rarely do I tell people about this process. I have gotten tired of 
arguing and trying to explain this process to a loser’s context. When   
I have talked about this option process, I often hear comments such as:
• “It takes too much time. I don’t want to spend my days  
 watching the market.”
• “It’s too risky, and I can’t afford to lose.”
• “I have no idea what you’re talking about.”
• “You can’t do that. It’s illegal.”
• “My stockbroker says it’s not that simple.”
• “What if you’re wrong and you make a mistake?”
• “You’re lying. You can’t do that.”
In other words, losers lose because they cannot listen without their 
context kicking in. 
This book has been about context and a person’s reality. The reason 
I hesitate giving people content is because most people’s context can’t 
handle the content I just discussed. Now that the book is drawing to a 
close, I am more willing to give you the content that so many people 
want. I just trust your context will allow you to absorb and allow you 
to use the content and turn it into action.
Chapter Seventeen304
In other words, when I am asked to tell what I do and I tell them, 
in many cases it is their context that fights back. Their context fights 
back, closes shut, argues, or finds reasons why it can’t be done. Now 
that I have spent time explaining context, I will give you the final 
content on why this writing of naked puts is a low-risk, high-return 
investment, even if things do not go your way.
The Price Drops to $35
First of all, I was not really concerned about having to come up 
with the $40,000 in order to cover my naked position. There are three 
reasons why I was not concerned about being wrong. 
The reasons are:
1. I had the money to cover my position in case I did have to buy 
the stocks.
2. History proves that 85 percent of all options expire without 
being exercised. An 85-percent chance of winning is far better 
than the odds offered by the stock market or Las Vegas.
3. I wanted to own the stock anyway. I just wanted to buy it at  
a deep discount.
So the question is, could the stock price have dropped and could  
I have been forced to buy the stock at $40 per share? The answer is 
yes. That is the agreement I sold as a naked put option. The difference 
is, a person with a winner’s context knows that he or she can win even 
when they lose. That is why they are not afraid of losing. A loser can 
only think of losing. That is why they rarely win.
Let’s say the price of the stock drops to $35 per share. A person 
with a loser’s context would only see the loss and never the win. A loser 
would say, “I just lost $40,000 because I had to buy 1,000 shares of 
stock at $40 per share.” The loser would see how much risk they had 
and never do the deal. Their context would slam shut or chatter on 
about how risky this idea was.
Retire Young Retire Rich305
They would not be able to think any further because their 
emotions have taken over their brain. The loser would see the $40,000 
exposure to be a greater risk of loss than the $5,000-in-five-minutes 
potential for gain. On top of that, if the stock had dropped to $35 a 
share, they would have seen an additional $5,000 loss. Their loser’s 
context would be in full control of the person.
The reason I spent so much time at the start of the book on the 
leverage of the mind is because of the examples of such transactions. 
When I tell people what I do—regardless if it is in building a business, 
investing in real estate, or investing in paper assets—it is most often 
the person’s context that determines the validity of my content. 
A loser will always, and I do mean always, think that what I do 
is too risky, even though it is not. A poor person will always, and I 
do mean always, think that they cannot afford to do what I do. A 
hardworking person will often say, “I don’t have the time to do what 
you do because I am too busy working.” And a person who is not 
interested in what I do will say, “It sounds too complicated. I just don’t 
understand. Besides, I’m not that interested in money.”
Most people will never retire young and retire rich simply because 
they do not have a context capable of making that idea a reality. That 
is why I spent so much time at the start of this book on the leverage of 
your mind and the leverage of your plan. Context is more important 
than content. What I did and I continue to do in order to have retired 
young and retired rich is simple, if you have the appropriate context. 
What I do is not hard, nor is it complicated. As I said, it took me less 
than five minutes to make $5,000. To many people, that possibility is 
out of their context, which is the same as saying that it is out of their 
reality. Many people would be willing to work 30 days just to make 
$5,000. They are willing to work for 30 days because their context 
allows them to think that $5,000 in 30 days is possible or real. But 
$5,000 in five minutes is not within their context, so that idea is met 
with, “He’s lying. It’s too risky. I can’t do that.” In other words, their 
context rejects the possibility. Instead, they come up with ideas that 
fit their context. That is why so many people spend their lives working 
Chapter Seventeen306
hard physically rather than working hard on expanding their context. 
They physically work hard for money rather than expand their financial 
context and increase the financial content they put into their brain.
A Winner’s Context
     The questions a person with a winner’s context would ask is, 
•  “How do I win if I lose?” 
•   “What happens if the price of XYZ goes below $40? How     
do I win then?” 
That is the context of a winner. They know they can win even 
if they lose. Most importantly, they can keep an open mind, even 
though what they are hearing is beyond their context. In other words, 
a winner can keep an open mind, even though what they are hearing 
frightens them or is completely new to them. As rich dad always said, 
“A loser’s mind closes faster than a winner’s mind.”
Earlier in this book I wrote about the importance of an exit 
strategy. A winner is always looking for a winning exit strategy, even 
if they are losing. Let’s use this naked put option as an example. 
Before going into the transaction, I already had an exit strategy that 
would allow me to win, even if things did not go my way. Again, it 
is the context more than the content. Regardless if it is in stocks, real 
estate, or business, it is a winning context that allows winners to win, 
regardless if they are losing. In this example, it is the context of having 
a winning exit strategy that is part of the winner’s context. 
A loser only sees the risk or the losses and never sees the possibility 
of winning, even if they do lose. A loser only takes a risk if they are 
guaranteed that things will go their way. That is why so many people 
want guaranteed pay and guaranteed benefits. They would rather have 
guarantees than possibilities. 
A winner will look for opportunities knowing they will win even if 
things do not go their way. It is not simply being an optimist. As rich 
dad said, “There are many people who think positive thoughts, but 
they think those thoughts inside a loser’s context. Having a winning 
context is knowing you will win, even if you lose.”
Retire Young Retire Rich307
How to Win if You Lose
On the day I called my broker, I had already done my homework, 
which took less than a minute. This is what I knew before placing  
the order:
• The market was trending down.
• The price of XYZ had recently been battered, dropping  
nearly $20 to $45. The investors who held the stock had to  
be pretty nervous.
• I knew XYZ was a good company with good earnings and 
dividends. It was well managed and it would do well in a  
good economy and a bad economy.
• It is a widely followed company, which means it has many 
investors who are interested in this company.
• It is a company I wanted to own and hold on to, if the price  
was right.
• I had $100,000 in an interest-bearing account if I had to buy 
the stock. All my broker had to do was transfer the money,  
and he had the authority to do so.
If the stock had fallen to $35 per share, I would have been ecstatic, 
even if I had to pay the $40,000 to fulfill my put-option agreement. 
Why? Again, the answer is my exit strategy.
Let’s say I had to pay $40,000 for 1,000 shares of stock. What is 
my real price of the stock?
The answer is $35,000, because I had already received $5,000 for the 
option. So even though the price fell below my put option price of $40 
per share, I was still paying only $35 per share, which would have been a 
great price for that stock anyway, and I would have owned the stock.
The next step would be to immediately sell ten covered-call 
options (100 shares per call option) at $5 per share on the 1,000 shares 
I owned. The reason it is called covered is because this time I actually 
did own the shares I was selling the option for. I used the term naked  
Chapter Seventeen308
in front of put option because I did not own the stock. Again, most 
people would simply say, “It’s too risky to sell something you do not 
own.” And it is, if you do not have the right context and content.
Why sell a covered call? The answer is found in the term velocity 
of money. By selling a covered call, I agree to sell my stock for, let’s 
say, $40 per share, in case the price should rapidly shoot up. A person 
afraid of missing out on a market move up will pay for an option. If 
the stock price had gone up to, let’s say, $50 per share, I would then 
be obligated to sell my 1,000 shares for $40,000. In this case, I would 
have gotten all my money back plus the money I collected from my 
options. So I would have won even if I had lost.
If the stock price did not go up, I would still have collected some 
money, in this case $5,000 for the call options, even if the price of the 
stock did nothing.
The average investor would be holding a losing position in this stock 
and listening to their financial advisor say, “Invest for the long term. 
Be patient. The stock market on average has gone up over the past 40 
years. So sit tight and wait.” That is more of the “buy, hold, and pray” 
mentality that most investors and many investment advisors have.
By selling covered-call options, I might have put another $5,000 in 
my pocket, again dropping the basis of my stock down to $30 a share, 
which would have made me even happier since I wanted to own the 
stock anyway. Because of my puts and call selling, instead of paying 
$40,000 for stock I wanted to own, I was actually paying $30,000, 
even though in this example the market would have been at $35,000.
It’s Like Learning to Eat with Your Other Hand
Again, if you did not fully understand this, do not worry. In 
theory, it is simple and not hard to understand, if you spend a little 
time studying the subject. It is much like learning to eat with your left 
hand after spending your life eating with your right. It is simple in 
theory and simple once you learn to do it. It’s learning to think and do 
things in different ways that is sometimes hard.
Retire Young Retire Rich309
What Everyone Can Do
To me, buying options to protect your assets makes sense. Selling 
options for cash flow is fun. One of the reasons I do not worry about 
money is simply because I know I can go to the market and make 
more money in minutes than most people make in months, and pay 
less in taxes.
Can everyone do what I do? Absolutely, but only if they are willing 
to invest some time in expanding their context and increasing their 
financial context.
So what can everyone do? The following are some suggestions:
• Borrow a book from the library on options trading. First learn  
the definitions of words. Then read for greater understanding.
• Buy a book. I recommend physically reviewing the book before 
buying it because you may want to start with a simple book first.
• Attend a seminar on options trading. There are many available.
• Find a stockbroker who will teach and guide you through  
the process.
• Play CASHFLOW 101  at least 12 times so you learn the mindset 
of fundamental investing. After you have mastered 101, you 
can move on to CASHFLOW 202 , which is the game that 
teaches people how to use call options, put options, shorts, and 
straddles. Most importantly, CASHFLOW 202  teaches you to 
think in multiple directions, depending on changing market 
trends. I believe the most powerful aspect of CASHFLOW 202 
is that it is a physical, mental, and emotional way of learning a 
multidimensional subject. In other words, the game will teach 
you to think in different directions. The reason most investors lose 
is because they have been trained at home, in school, and in the 
workplace to think only in one direction. A sophisticated investor 
needs to think about how to make money in an up-trending 
market, a down-trending market, and a sideways-trending market.  
CASHFLOW 202 teaches you to think that way, have fun, and 
learn by using play money instead of real money.
Chapter Seventeen310
Is Investing Risky?
So is investing risky? My answer is, “Absolutely not.” In my 
opinion, being ignorant is risky. If you want to retire young and retire 
rich, learning how to insure your assets against loss is fundamental. It 
is the average investor who would rather not study and would rather 
say that investing is risky. That is the greatest of risks. 
Never in the history of the world have so many people bet their 
financial future and their financial security on the ups and downs of a 
stock market. That is risky only because these investors know it’s risky, 
and yet they do nothing about the risk. As my rich dad said, “The 
I in the I quadrant stands for ‘Investor,’ not ‘Ignorance.’” He also 
said, “Investing in itself is not risky. But being financially ignorant 
and taking advice from financially ignorant advisors is very risky.” 
Not only is it risky, but it is also expensive. It is expensive not only 
in terms of money. It’s more expensive in terms of time. Millions of 
people spend their lives clinging to job security rather than seeking 
financial freedom. Because of financial ignorance, many people cling 
to a small paycheck rather than seek the abundance of money that is 
available. Because of financial ignorance, people put money in their 
retirement accounts and then worry about it being there when they 
need it. Because of financial ignorance, millions of people spend more 
time at work making the rich richer, rather than spend their time 
enriching the lives of those they love. I would not say investing is 
risky. But I would say that being financially ignorant is risky, and it  
is expensive.
Information contained herein is for educational purposes only, 
and is based on reports, communications, or sources believed 
to be reliable. However, such information has not been verified, 
and we do not make any representation as to its accuracy. 
Options transactions can entail an additional level of risk. Before 
undertaking any options transactions, all investors should seek 
the guidance and advice of a licensed options professional.
Chapter Eighteen
THE LEVERAGE OF A 
B-QUADRANT BUSINESS311
The Richest Game in the World
The richest self-made people in the world are entrepreneurs from the 
B quadrant. They are far richer than movie stars, sports stars, and highly 
paid professionals. When I made my decision to not follow in my poor 
dad’s footsteps after returning from Vietnam, it was my rich dad who 
suggested I start by learning to build businesses. He said, “The reason 
the richest people in the world are from the B quadrant is because it is 
the hardest quadrant to be successful in. But if you are successful, the 
floodgates of abundance open up and wealth showers down upon you. 
If you can build a B-quadrant business, you are playing in the richest 
game in the world.”
When you look back upon recent history, it is people like Bill 
Gates, Steve Jobs, Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, John D. Rockefeller, 
and others who are at the top of the famous B-quadrant list. There are 
many more who are not as famous. All of them became financial giants 
because they built a giant asset. They used the biggest leverage of all, the 
leverage of building a business that served millions of people.
It has been said that the best investment you can make is an 
investment in your own business, and I agree. The returns on your 
investment defy normal investment calculations, if you know what 
you are doing. It is possible to take a few hundred dollars and turn 
Chapter Eighteen312
it into billions of dollars. It is also possible to not only make yourself 
rich, but make your friends, family, business associates, employees, and 
investors richer beyond their wildest dreams. That is why it is called 
the richest game in the world.
When I was younger, rich dad constantly reminded me that there 
are four basic classes of assets. They are:
1. Real estate
2. Paper assets 
3. Business
4. Commodities
While I do dabble in paper assets, real estate, and commodities, 
it was the business asset that rich dad encouraged me to focus on. He 
said, “Start with the hardest first, and the rest will be easy.” Today,  
I tend to agree with him.
Exit Strategy
In this book I wrote about the importance of an exit strategy.  
They are:
Poor  $25,000 or less per year after they retire
Middle class $25,000 to $100,000 per year
Affluent  $100,000 to $1 million per year
Rich  $1 million or more per year
Ultra-rich  $1 million or more a month
I ask that you begin to pay some attention to the idea of your own 
personal exit strategy. Also note your mindset or your context as you 
ponder your choice. Is your mind saying, “I can’t do that,” or “That 
would be too much trouble,” or “I’m not smart enough,” or other such 
context-defining personal realities?
When my rich dad worked with me on my personal exit strategy, 
I had to go through the doubts and limitations caused by my limited 
context. After a few months of discussion, I knew my best chances 
Retire Young Retire Rich313
were in the B quadrant. In my opinion, even before choosing your exit 
level, you may want to assess your personal strengths and weaknesses, 
and which quadrant offers you the best shot at retiring young and 
retiring rich.
Someone in my investment class said, “Oprah Winfrey became the 
richest woman in entertainment through the S quadrant.”
I asked the individual why he thought that. His reply was, 
“Because she is a self-employed person. If she stopped working, her 
income would stop.”
“How do you know that?” I asked. I then asked him what HARPO 
Productions was. He did not know.
My answer was, “HARPO (“Oprah” spelled backward) 
Productions is Oprah’s company, her B-quadrant business. That 
business is run by other people and invests in other ventures. She may 
be a star in the S quadrant, but her context is in the B quadrant.”
The point of saying all this is that the quadrant you are in has little 
to do with what your profession is. Michael Jordan may have been an 
employee of the Chicago Bulls, yet he still had his own B-quadrant 
business on the side. Medical doctors can be in the E, S, B, or I 
quadrant, depending upon their context. So can a janitor be in all  
four quadrants. 
I say all this because too many people have a mindset in only one 
context, rather than learning to have more than one context. Those 
people with tight or rigid context walls often work the hardest, the 
longest, and often wind up with the least. In today’s Information 
Age, it is imperative that we all have more than one context and be in 
more than one quadrant. If you can do that, you will find that your 
possibilities of attaining a higher-level exit strategy will become easier, 
and possibly more realistic.
In other words, the reason Kim and I can exit at or above the 
ultra-rich level is because we operate primarily from the B quadrant. 
Instead of working for thousands or millions, we work to have tens of 
millions, and maybe more, as our exit strategy.
Chapter Eighteen314
Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote about my decision to learn 
to become an entrepreneur. In all my books, I write about the number 
of times I failed, and what it took to stand back up. In my opinion, it 
is the context of being successful, regardless of which quadrant you are 
in. The reason I mention book number three is because the second half 
of that book is about building a business, the biggest and richest asset of 
all. If you would like to build a B-quadrant business, you may want to 
read or reread that book, since I will not be going into how to build a 
business in this chapter.
Also, the reason I support network marketing so much is because the 
word network is the word that the very rich use.  
I wrote a book for the network-marketing industry entitled,  
The Business School for People Who Like Helping People . That short and 
simple book is written primarily for anyone who wants to make the switch 
from the E and S quadrant. The book supports anyone who wants to 
invest the time to change their context from the E and S quadrants to the 
B quadrant, the quadrant that produces the richest people in the world. 
The book explains why people like John D. Rockefeller and Bill Gates 
built networks. It opens with rich dad’s statement, “The richest people in 
the world look for and build networks. Everyone else looks for work.”
A friend came to me and said, “I made a 35-percent return on my 
mutual funds.” I replied with a sincere congratulations. When he asked 
me what my returns were, I said, “I really do not know.” It is not that 
I do not know, but I did not know how to tell him that my returns do 
not fit normal standards of measurement. While my friend’s mutual-
fund investments had returned him 35 percent on his money, which is 
good, my personal returns were in the millions of dollars without any 
of my original money invested. You may recall the previous chapter 
discussing the velocity of one’s money. The reason I had trouble 
answering his question is because my money had already moved on. 
My return on investments was technically infinite. That is why I said 
little about my returns and congratulated him on his success.
Retire Young Retire Rich315
Again, my point in stating this is not to brag about my results.  
The point I want to make is about the differences in context. My 
friend is happy to receive a 35-percent return, while a person who 
builds a business would not be. In my opinion, it is the power found 
in the differences in context. A person from the E and S quadrants 
often has a different point of view on what is possible financially. A 
person from the E or S quadrant is often willing to work hard forever, 
never really asking himself if there is another way to accomplish what 
they want to accomplish. So the reason I recommend the network-
marketing industry and its educational programs is primarily to give 
individuals a chance to open their context to other points of view.
By the way, my friend’s 35-percent return turned into a negative 
return the following year with the market downturn.
Why Don’t More People Build B-Quadrant Businesses?
The question is: If building a B-quadrant business is so lucrative, 
then why don’t more people do it? A part of the answer is found in the 
following lesson from rich dad.
When I was making my decision to start my first real B-quadrant 
business, I asked rich dad, “If building businesses is the richest game  
in the world, why don’t more people play the game? Is it because of  
lack of money, skills, or talent?”
Rich dad’s answer was short and to the point. He said, “The hardest 
thing about business is working with people.”
“People?” I asked. “Working with people is the hardest part  
of business?”
Rich dad nodded and said, “Most people cannot build a business 
simply because they lack people skills. People work with people all day 
long, but just because they work together does not mean they can start 
a business together. And just because they start a business together does 
not mean that business will grow into a very large business.”
“So if I learn to work with people, I can play the richest game in the 
world?” I asked. “If I learn to work with people I can become very rich?”
Rich dad nodded.
Chapter Eighteen316
If You Can Work with Different People, 
You Can Become Rich Beyond Your Wildest Dreams
Over the years, rich dad spent a substantial amount of time teaching 
his son and me how to work and deal with different types of people. If 
you read Rich Kid Smart Kid , you may recall that rich dad often had his 
son and me sit with him as he interviewed people. Learning how to hire 
and fire people was an interesting learning process, especially when the 
people rich dad was hiring and firing were as old as my mom and dad. 
To him, teaching his son and me how to deal with different types of 
people was one of the most important educational headstarts he could 
give us. He would say, “If you can work with different people, you can 
become rich beyond your wildest dreams.”
For those of you who read Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant , you 
may remember how important this simple diagram was to rich dad:
 
Rich dad created this diagram to illustrate his point that the  
world of business is made up of four different types of people. The  
E quadrant represents employees, the S represents small business or  
the self-employed, the B quadrant represents the business owner, and 
the I quadrant represents the investor.
The primary point of this diagram was that people from the 
different quadrants are different at the core. Rich dad would say, 
“To be successful in the B quadrant, you need to know how to 
communicate with and work with people from all four quadrants. It is 
the only quadrant that absolutely requires that ability.” In other words, 
one of the reasons so many businesses fail is because the entrepreneur 
is often unable to work and get along with different types of people.
Retire Young Retire Rich317
During the 1980s, I was back in Hawaii, and rich dad invited me 
to sit in on a board meeting where he was one of the directors. The 
company was in trouble, and rich dad wanted me to learn from this 
unpleasant experience. The company was a small start-up company 
that explored for oil in Canada. Rich dad did not form the company, 
but now that the company was in trouble, he had been invited to join 
the board and see if the company could be saved.
The company got into trouble due to a single decision by the 
CFO. This decision had left the company deeply in debt and about to 
go bankrupt. After the meeting began, rich dad asked the rest of the 
board, “Why was he [the CFO] allowed to make such a big financial 
decision without checking with the board?”
The answer from another board member was, “Because he was a 
senior vice president of XYZ Giant Oil Company.”
Rich dad raised his voice and said, “So what? So what if he was at 
one time a senior vice president of a large oil company?”
“Well, we thought he knew much more than we did. So we let him 
act on his own,” said another board member.
Rich dad rapped his fingers on the table and then said, “He may 
have been a senior vice president, but he was still an employee for 30 
years. He was an employee of a large company. He has not a clue on 
how to run a small start-up business with a very limited budget.  
I recommend you replace him, preferably with someone who owned 
his or her own company and has had full financial responsibilities, 
even if it was not an oil company. There is a very big difference 
between an employee and an entrepreneur, regardless of what industry 
they come from. There is a very big difference between running a small 
company and a big company. In a big company, a mistake of this size 
doesn’t hurt the company. In a small company, a mistake of this size 
destroys the company.”
The company eventually went bankrupt. A year later, I asked rich 
dad why it finally went down. He said, “The company was grossly 
mismanaged from the board of directors on down. Although the 
company had hired great people and paid them a lot of money, those 
Chapter Eighteen318
people never became a great team. Successful entrepreneurs create 
great teams. That is how they compete with big companies with more 
money and more people.”
The Different Skills
In Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing , I wrote about rich dad’s            
B-I T riangle.
The B-I T riangle is important for anyone who wants to start a 
B-quadrant business or already owns one. It is also important for 
anyone who has a million-dollar idea and plans on turning it into a 
business. In other words, one of the reasons people have a difficult 
time starting a B-quadrant business is because a true business needs 
more than one skill or specialty.
Our school system produces people with specialized skills. It takes 
a true entrepreneur to pull these skills together and have them work as 
a team in order to build a power company.L E A D E R S H I P
T E A M
MISSIONCash FlowCommunicationsSystemsLegalProduct
Retire Young Retire Rich319
The Big Problem
The big problem goes beyond just having all four quadrants in 
your business and having the different technical skills of the B-I 
T riangle. The problem is finding a leader, an entrepreneur who can get 
these different people with different skills and different core values to 
work together as a team. That is why rich dad said, “The hardest thing 
about business is working with people.” He also said, “Business would 
be easy if it weren’t for people.”
In other words, an entrepreneur must first be a great leader, and all 
of us can work on improving our leadership skills. 
What Is an Entrepreneur?
Rich dad taught his son and me to be entrepreneurs. When I  
asked him what an entrepreneur was, he said, “An entrepreneur sees  
an opportunity, puts together a team, and builds a business that profits 
from the opportunity.”
I then asked him, “What if I see an opportunity, and I can take 
advantage of it by myself?”
“Great question,” said rich dad. “If you see an opportunity and you 
can take advantage of the opportunity by yourself, then you are a small 
businessman or a self-employed person.” Rich dad went on to explain 
the difference between a tradesman and an entrepreneur. He said, 
“A tradesman or craftsman is someone who can produce a product 
or provide a service primarily by themselves. For example, artist can 
paint pictures by themselves or dentists can fix teeth by themselves. 
T rue entrepreneurs cannot do what they need to do by themselves. An 
entrepreneur must be able to pull together smart people from different 
disciplines and skills and have them work together to achieve a 
common goal. In other words, an entrepreneur builds teams that take 
on products that no one individual can do on their own. The reason 
most people remain small is because they solve problems they can  
solve themselves.”
Chapter Eighteen320
“So an entrepreneur takes on a task that requires a team,” I said. 
“A B-quadrant person does not get paid unless their team can do what 
needs to be done as a team. Most employees and self-employed people 
get paid for what they can do as individuals.  Entrepreneurs don’t get 
paid unless their team is successful.”
Rich dad nodded and explained further by saying, “Just as a 
building contractor uses trades people (such as plumbers, electricians, 
and carpenters) and professional people (such as architects and 
accountants) to build a house, an entrepreneur brings in different 
trades people, technicians, and professional people to help him or her 
build a business.”
“So in your mind, an entrepreneur is really a team leader, although 
they may not physically work on the team?” I asked.
“The better you can lead a team of smart, qualified people without 
having to work as part of the team, the better and bigger entrepreneur 
you can become,” said rich dad. “I own several companies, but I do 
not do any of the work inside the company. That way I can make more 
money and do more things without having to do the work. That is 
why leadership is an essential skill required to be a true entrepreneur.”
“Can leadership skills be learned?” I asked.
“Yes,” said rich dad. “I have noticed that all of us have some 
leadership skills. The problem with most people is that they devote 
their lives developing their professional or career skills, which is why 
there are more people in the E and S quadrants. Very few people 
devote their lives developing their leadership skills, which is the skill 
most required for the B quadrant. So, yes, leadership can be learned.” 
Years later, rich dad said, “Leaders rise to challenges, while others look 
for job security.”
Leadership Lessons from Vietnam
Some of you may know that I went to Vietnam for several reasons. 
One was because both my dads thought it was the obligation of sons 
to defend or fight for their country. Another reason was to learn 
leadership skills. Rich dad said, “Asking soldiers to overcome their fears 
Retire Young Retire Rich321
and perform courageously while under intense pressure and risk of life is 
a test of anyone’s leadership skills.” 
While in Vietnam, I saw men do horrible things, but I also saw men 
perform feats of bravery I will never forget. One of my commanding 
officers said, “Inside every soldier is a hero. It is the leader’s job to 
bring out that hero that lives in each of us.” Today, I use many of the 
leadership skills I learned in combat in my business. In combat, we did 
not give young men orders and expect them to follow orders blindly. In 
combat, we learned to ask young men to be heroes, and that skill works 
in business as well as in combat.
Develop Your Own Leadership Skills
You don’t have to go to war to develop your own leadership skills. 
All you have to do is take on challenges that others run away from. 
Most of us have heard the saying, “Never volunteer for anything.” To 
me, that is the creed of a person who is going to go backward in life. 
Rich dad often said, “Leaders take on challenges that others are afraid 
of.” He also said, “The size of the leader is measured by the size of the 
task they undertake.” Dwight Eisenhower is famous because he took 
on the D-Day invasion and the European campaign during World 
War II. John Kennedy took on the task of putting a man on the moon. 
Leaders seek challenges that others back away from. Too many people 
never develop their leadership skills simply because they make it a 
habit to back away from the challenges placed in front of them. They 
make it a habit of never volunteering.
Every business, every church, every charity, and every community 
needs more leaders. Each organization gives you the opportunity to step 
forward and be accountable. Each opportunity gives you a chance to learn 
those priceless leadership skills required in the world of entrepreneurship.
Many people are not qualified to participate in the richest game of 
all, the game of building businesses, simply because they fail to gain 
the skills of leadership.
If you step forward to be responsible for your church’s potluck 
dinner, you are stepping forward to gain more leadership skills. Even 
Chapter Eighteen322
if no one volunteers with you, you will learn something important. 
You will learn how to reach out and speak to the hero that rests inside 
each and every one of us. If you learn to do that, the next leadership 
task you undertake will be easier, more successful, and you will learn 
more about leadership. If you do not develop your leadership skills, 
the chances of you building a business and participating in the richest 
game in the world may never be developed. I have met so many smart 
people with great business ideas, but they simply lack the leadership 
skills required to build a business team and have that team turn their 
ideas into millions, maybe billions, of dollars. In the richest game 
in the world, leadership is the key, because it takes a leader to turn 
individuals into a team.
A Tip from the Marine Corps
As a new Marine Lieutenant in Vietnam, I had a commanding 
officer put up this simple list:
MISSION 
TEAM
INDIVIDUAL
He said, “The highest priority is the mission. The individual is last.”
After returning from Vietnam, I often saw more people with a 
different ranking of priorities. In business and in the civilian world,  
I often see people with their list in this ranking of priority:
INDIVIDUAL
TEAM
MISSION  
In other words, they come first, their group second, and the overall 
mission of the business or the organization comes last, if at all.
Retire Young Retire Rich323
In Vietnam, my commanding officer explained that as junior 
officers, our job was to protect the mission and the team from the 
betrayals of individuals. In other words, we were trained to take out ,  
in one way or another, anyone from within our ranks who thought  
of himself first and, in doing so, jeopardized the team and the mission. 
Learning and practicing that in combat has greatly affected my way  
of leading in business.
For those of you who saw Steven Spielberg’s Saving Private Ryan , 
the most realistic movie on war I have seen, there is a great lesson. 
In the movie, Tom Hanks, a schoolteacher who became an Army 
lieutenant, could not shoot a German prisoner. To me, that was the 
pivotal point of the movie, and also one of its great lessons. Because 
Tom Hanks could not do his job, which in this case was to take out 
the German prisoner, he put himself, his team, and the mission of the 
team in grave jeopardy. In the end, not only were many of his men 
killed because of his inability to shoot a German prisoner, but the 
mission almost failed. Tom Hanks was ultimately killed by the man  
he would not kill.
It is fortunate that most people will never have to face the horrors 
of war and some of the tough, heartbreaking decisions that are often 
required. Nonetheless, we all face such tough decisions in our personal 
lives and in our business lives. Some examples are:
•  The other night at a party at a friend’s home, one of the guests 
got very drunk. When he stood to leave, the host asked him 
for his car keys and offered to call a cab. The guest became very 
upset, denying that he was too drunk to drive. An unpleasant 
scene erupted and the host persisted, finally wrestling the guest 
to the ground and forcibly taking his keys. A cab was called, 
and the guest was sent away safe, but very upset. The guest and 
the host have not talked since. To make matters worse, some of 
the other guests think the host overreacted and they too have 
decided not to talk to the host. Personally, I think the host was 
very brave and did the best thing at that time. Could the host 
have handled it differently? Sure. But he did what he thought 
was best at that moment. That is what leaders do, even if what 
they do is not the best thing to do.
Chapter Eighteen324
•  Years ago, my rich dad found out that one of his top managers 
was having an affair with one of the secretaries in his company. 
He immediately called the man in and asked him to leave. 
The secretary was also asked to leave. When I asked him why, 
he simply said, “Both are married with children. Anyone who 
would cheat on their spouse and their children is someone 
who will cheat on anyone.” I am not saying rich dad did the 
right thing, but again, he did what he thought was best at the 
moment. Although both employees were very important to 
him, he felt that their actions were not in keeping with the 
values he wanted for his company. He said, “When I take a 
stand, everyone else knows where they stand.”
Both stories are examples of leadership. It has been said that 
“leaders do the right things, and managers do things right.” Rich dad 
agreed with that statement. He said, “Leadership is not a popularity 
contest. Leaders inspire others to be leaders.”
A Final Lesson from Vietnam
At the end of his talk to his junior officers, my commanding officer 
added the following words to his talk and his diagram:
 
 
The officer then said, “A leader is responsible to the mission, the 
team, and the individuals. But as you can see, a good leader must 
also be a good follower. He must realize that his team’s mission is 
important because it is a part of a bigger mission, and he must answer 
to a higher calling.”MISSION
TEAM
INDIVIDUALBIGGER MISSION LEADER
Retire Young Retire Rich325
Rich dad said, “A slingshot is just a slingshot. When David stepped 
forward to take on Goliath, the greatest forces in the world stepped 
forward with him.” He also said, “Always remember that the richest 
game in the world is just a game with a mission and a higher calling.”
In closing, I leave you with this thought. Each and every day, new 
Goliaths are born and new Goliaths step forward. What the world 
needs are more and more new Davids, armed with just a slingshot, but 
backed by the most powerful forces in the world. Regardless whether 
or not you choose to play the richest game in the world, just know 
that you too can access the power that powered David’s slingshot. All 
you have to know is who your Goliath is, and then find the courage 
to step forward bravely. The moment you do that, you begin playing 
the richest game in the world, a game where the rewards are far more 
important than money. When you step forward, you tap into the 
power that was behind David’s slingshot. When you find that power, 
your life will never be the same. 
As they said in Star Wars  (the modern version of David and 
Goliath), “May the force be with you.” This invisible force is the 
greatest of all leverage, and it is a leverage that is available to all of us. 
All you have to do is step forward and take on something bigger  
than yourself.
The conclusion of this book is about the rewards from building  
or acquiring assets that work hard so you do not have to.

Chapter Nineteen
HOT TIPS327
Things You Can Do to Get Rich and Stay Rich
The process of retiring young and retiring rich is a mental and 
emotional process, more than a physical process. If you are prepared 
mentally and emotionally, what you physically have to do is very little. 
The following are some additional mental and emotional processes that 
you may want to incorporate into your life. If you do these suggested 
simple processes regularly and they become a part of your life, I trust 
you will find that retiring young and retiring rich will become more of a 
possibility for you.
Why Do You Need a Paycheck?
When I was in high school, rich dad often had me sit next to 
him when people came in to apply for a job. During one of these 
interviews, a man a few years older than rich dad came in to apply for 
a management position in one of rich dad’s companies. This applicant 
was about 45 years old, was well educated, had a very impressive 
resume, a great employment record, was well dressed, and seemed 
confident and competent. As the interview progressed, this gentleman 
continually reminded rich dad that he had gone to a great state college 
and had received his MBA from a prestigious university on the East 
Coast, with honors.
“I’m interested in hiring you,” said rich dad, after interviewing him 
for about an hour, “but why do you want such a high salary?”
Again, the applicant referred back to his impressive education and 
his work record, saying, “I’m well educated and I have the right job 
Chapter Nineteen328
experience, which makes me highly qualified for the job and deserving of 
the salary.”
“I don’t disagree,” said rich dad, “but let me ask you this. If you’re so 
well educated and so experienced, why do you need a job? If you’re so 
smart, why do you need a paycheck?”
The applicant was taken aback by that question. He stammered a 
little and then said, “Well, everyone needs a job. We all need a paycheck.”
The room became very quiet as rich dad let his answer echo in the 
room. It was obvious that the applicant came from a different reality, a 
different context, a different mindset from rich dad. He was becoming 
argumentative and beginning to defend his reality, instead of trying 
to understand rich dad’s reality. Looking up at the applicant, rich dad 
quietly said, “I don’t. If this business folded, I still would never need 
a paycheck.” He then turned to his son and me and said, “These boys 
don’t. They work for me for free. That is why they’re going to be far richer 
than you someday, even if they don’t go to as good a school as you did 
or receive the academic honors you have. I don’t want these boys to ever 
want or need a paycheck.” With that, rich dad picked up the applicant’s 
resume, placed it on top of a pile of other resumes, and said, “I’ll call you 
if I’m interested in hiring you.” The interview was over.
Tips on How to Get Rich
In Rich Dad Poor Dad , I wrote about how rich dad took my  
10-cents-an-hour job away and offered me his reality, the reality that  
I could become richer faster if I worked for free. People often say,  
“You didn’t really work for free,” or “My house is an asset.” Little do they 
know that they may have read the book, yet they continue to  
see the world from their same reality, context, or mindset.
When rich dad asked that applicant, “If you’re so well educated and 
so experienced, why do you need a job? If you’re so smart, why do you 
need a paycheck?” he was asking the applicant to expand his reality. But 
instead of doing his best to expand his reality, the applicant argued and 
defended his reality, closed his mind, and for all practical purposes, ended 
his chances of being employed by rich dad.
 
Retire Young Retire Rich329
A World Without Paychecks
I created the CASHFLOW  game to teach people how to live in a 
world without paychecks. People who play the game repeatedly often 
find the possibility of such a world to be far more exciting than working 
hard all their life for a paycheck. If you want to retire as young and as rich 
as possible, you will need to consider a world without a paycheck. If, in 
your reality, context, or mindset, you need a paycheck, the chances of you 
retiring young and retiring rich are slim. 
Rich dad often said, “People who need a paycheck are slaves to 
money. If you want to be set free, you must never need a paycheck or 
a job.” So if you are serious about retiring young and rich, you too will 
need to change your reality to the possibility of a world without a steady 
paycheck or a job. When I state this context to most people, you can 
almost feel their blood pressure rise, their chest and stomach tighten, and 
hear their subconscious mind take over their conscious thought. The fear 
of not having a steady paycheck to cover one’s financial survival is a fear 
most of us know well. If you have difficulty seeing yourself in a world of 
not needing a paycheck or a steady job, then your first step is to begin 
asking yourself, “How can I get rich without a paycheck or steady job?” 
The moment you begin asking yourself that question, you open your 
mind and begin your journey into another reality.
When rich dad asked the person applying for the job, “If you’re so 
well educated and so experienced, why do you need a job? If you’re so 
smart, why do you need a paycheck?” he was asking him to stretch his 
reality and see another reality. Instead, the applicant argued and defended 
his reality, thinking his reality was the only reality. I have seen rich dad 
ask that question of other applicants. It was his way of actually trying to 
help the applicant. It was his way of trying to teach the applicant a very 
important and basic financial lesson, the lesson that money will not make 
you rich, that a high-paying job alone will not solve your financial needs. 
When rich dad asked anyone that question, he was trying to have 
that person understand that academic success does not necessarily 
equate to financial success. As rich dad often said, “A high academic 
IQ does not necessarily mean you have a high financial IQ.” During 
Chapter Nineteen330
the interview with the person who was so proud of his academic 
achievements, rich dad was really doing his best to find out if this 
person was interested in learning how to increase his financial IQ. As 
I said, I have seen rich dad ask that same question of other applicants. 
Those that listened to his reality and studied with rich dad as they 
worked for him became very wealthy, retired early, and went on to live 
lives of financial freedom,  even though they were not paid the high 
salaries they initially wanted.
The point is this: If you want to retire young and retire rich, 
financial IQ is more important than academic IQ. The following are 
really tips on how to increase your financial IQ so you can begin to 
live in a world without needing a paycheck. The sooner you can see a 
world without paychecks, the better chance you have of becoming  
rich quicker.
Hot Tip #1
So hot tip number one is: Begin to see yourself in a world or reality 
where you will never ever need a paycheck or job again.  It does not mean 
you will never work again. It simply means that you will stop being so 
financially needy or even desperate, selling your precious life for a few 
dollars, living in fear of losing your paycheck or being destitute.
Once you can entertain a world of never needing a paycheck again, 
you can begin to see the other world, the world without jobs or paychecks.
Bill Gates Is Low Paid
A number of years ago, I saw a headline that read, “Bill Gates is 
Not the Highest-Paid Man in the World.” The article went on to say 
that there are many executives in the world of business who are paid 
much more than Bill Gates, yet Gates was the richest man in the 
world. The article stated that, at that time, Gates was only paid about 
$500,000 a year, but his asset base was in the billions and growing.
Retire Young Retire Rich331
Hot Tip #2
If you let go of the idea of needing a steady paycheck from 
ordinary income, the next question to ask yourself is: What kind of 
income do you want? Earlier in this book I stated that there are three 
basic kinds of income. They are:
• Ordinary 50-percent money
• Portfolio 20-percent money
• Passive 0-percent money
These are the three main categories, yet there are many other types 
of income. Most people have spent their lives studying and working 
hard for ordinary income, which is why so few people can retire young 
or retire rich. If you are serious about retiring young, begin studying 
the different types of income which will allow you to become rich 
without working forever. Some of the other types of income are:
• Residual income , which is income from a business, such as a 
network-marketing business or a franchise business you own, 
but someone else runs.
• Dividend income , which can be income from stocks.
• Interest income , which is income from savings or bonds.
• Royalty income , which can be income from songs or books you 
have written, and trademarks and inventions (whether or not 
patentable) that you have created.
• Financial instrument income , such as income from trust deeds 
from real estate.
So the hot tip is, once you get used to the idea of not having 
income from a job or your labor, then you can begin researching 
different types of income that come from different types of assets.  
Rich dad had Mike and me study and research the different types of 
income and then decide which type we wanted to study further.
Chapter Nineteen332
You can go online or ask your accountant about the different types 
of income there are, income that is derived from things other than 
your labor. The moment you begin to study and find the different 
kinds of income that interest you, they begin to become a part of your 
new and expanding reality.
The point is, don’t do too much. Just let other types of income and 
assets come into your reality. The more the idea of different types of 
income settles in and the more you think about such income without 
the pressure of having to do anything, the more the idea takes root 
in your brain and begins to grow. Most people think they must do 
something immediately, but that is not my experience. I simply let the 
idea of investing in real estate for passive income rattle around in my 
brain for years before I bought my first property. One day I woke up 
and I knew it was time to begin taking classes and begin investing. It 
was relatively effortless, but only after I let the idea become a part of 
my new reality.
When you look at a financial statement, it is understandable why 
my poor dad insisted on job security.
Since my poor dad had no assets and always said, “Investing is 
risky,” he naturally clung desperately to his job. After all, that is all he 
had and the only income he knew of was ordinary income.AssetsINCOME STATEMENT
BALANCE SHEET
LiabilitiesIncome
ExpensesPoor Dad
Rich Dad
Retire Young Retire Rich333
My rich dad had his son and me focus our attention on acquiring 
assets and developing the financial IQ to acquire those assets. Because 
we had learned the importance of financial IQ, his son and I worked 
diligently to increase our skills to acquire those assets. Although we 
were nervous at the start, today, acquiring assets is fun, easy, and 
exciting. When I say it is easy to get rich and stay rich, it is true, if you 
give yourself the time to allow that reality to grow into your reality.
While on a trip through Australia, a young baggage handler took 
my bags at the airport and said, “I love your books.”
I thanked him for telling me and asked him what he had learned.
“Well, the first thing I learned is that this job will never make me 
rich. So I work a job at nights and I invest the money from my second 
job into real estate.”
“That’s great,” I replied. “How have you done so far?”
“I’ve bought six properties in a year and a half.”
“Great,” I said. “I’m proud of you. Have you made any money?”
“No, not yet,” the handsome young man said. “But I have learned 
something very important.”
“What is that?” I asked.
“It gets easier. Once I got over my initial doubt, fear, and lack of 
money, I find it’s getting easier to be an investor. The more deals I 
look at and the more investments I buy, the easier investing becomes. 
My financial IQ would never have gone up if I had let my doubt and 
fear keep me paralyzed. Instead of feeling fear today, I feel excitement, 
even though I still have not made much money. In fact, I lost money 
on two of my six investments. As you say in your books, mistakes are 
learning experiences. They are priceless if you learn from them. So now 
I can see myself being a full-time property investor someday soon. In a 
few years, I will never need a job or a paycheck ever again.”
“Do you have a goal, a specific date you will be out of the Rat Race 
and financially free?” I asked.
“Definitely,” said the young man with a smile. “I have three other 
friends about the same age. We all are doing this together. We don’t 
waste our time like other guys our age do. We study together, go to 
Chapter Nineteen334
seminars together, and we help each other invest. We don’t plan on 
following in our parents’ footsteps. We don’t want to make the same 
mistakes they did, working for 45 years, afraid of losing our jobs, 
hoping for a pay raise, and waiting until 65 to retire. My parents 
worked so hard climbing the corporate ladder that they had no time 
for the kids or for the things they really loved. They’re now getting 
ready to retire, but they’re old. I don’t want to be like them. I don’t 
want to be old when I stop working. All four of us are under 24, and 
we all have goals of being financially free by the age of thirty.”
“Congratulations,” I said and shook his hand. As he finished 
processing my bags for the flight, I thanked him for reading my book 
and making me feel like a proud dad.
As I left the counter, the young man smiled and shouted, “The 
biggest thing is that it’s getting easier. The more I focus on building my 
assets, the easier it’s getting.”
I waved good-bye and rushed for my flight.
In my reality, the better you are at acquiring assets, the easier it 
becomes to become richer faster and faster. If you keep your humility, 
even though rich, and are grateful rather than arrogant about your 
wealth, I believe you have a better chance of keeping that money forever.
 
Hot Tip #3
Hot tip #3 may sound strange, so please read carefully. Hot tip #3 
is to tell lies about your future .
The young baggage handler could see his future, and he was 
excited about it. Not everyone can see such a bright future, which is 
why hot tip #3 might sound strange, yet it is an important part of the 
process in retiring young and retiring rich.
Not long ago, I was teaching an investment course, and several of 
the participants could not stop saying such things as:
• “I can’t do that.”
• “I’ll never be rich.”
• “I’m not a good investor.”
Retire Young Retire Rich335
• “I’m not smart enough.”
• “Investing is risky.”
• “I’ll never get the money to do what I want.”
There was a very successful psychotherapist in the class who raised 
her hand to help out. She said, “Anything said about the future is a lie.”
“The future is a lie?” I asked. “Why do you say that?”
“First of all,” she said, “I want to be clear that I am not 
encouraging anyone to lie for the purpose of deception. Is that clear?”
I nodded my head. “I understand, but my question is, why do you 
say that the future is a lie?”
“Good question,” she said. “I’m glad to hear that you keep an open 
mind. What I mean by the future is a lie is that anything said about 
the future is not yet a fact, so anything you say about anything in the 
future is technically a lie.”
“So how is that useful for these participants who cannot seem to shake 
some of their negative perceptions about themselves or their abilities?”
“When the person who said, ‘I’ll never be rich,’ made that 
statement, he was making a statement about something that was 
supposedly true in the future, in this case, the idea that he’ll never be 
rich,” said the therapist. “Well, that statement is technically a lie. I’m 
not calling the individual a liar. I am just saying that the statement is a 
lie, since the future has not yet happened.”
“So what does that mean?” I asked.
 “It means exactly what you have been trying to get this class to 
realize. They need to understand that what they say and what they 
think has the power to become real and become their reality. So many 
people tell lies about their future, and those lies become their future.”
“You mean when someone says, ‘I’ll never be rich,’ they are telling 
a lie because they are referring to an event projected sometime into the 
future. Is that what you mean?”
“Exactly,” said the therapist. “And the problem is, a lie becomes true.”
“So when someone says, ‘Investing is risky,’ they are in some ways 
telling a lie if they are speaking about the future?”
Chapter Nineteen336
“Yes, and then a lie becomes truth if they do not change the lie. 
Always remember that anything in reference to the future is technically 
a lie, simply because nothing in the future is yet a fact or truth.”
“So how is this bit of information useful?” I asked again.
“Well, as a therapist, I have found that most unsuccessful, 
unhappy, unfulfilled people tell the most horrible lies about 
themselves. They say what you have been trying to stop people from 
saying. They say, ‘I’ll never be rich.’ ‘I could never do that.’ ‘That will 
never work.’ All lies, but lies that have the power to become truths.”
“And if they don’t say those lies, they spend time with other people 
who will tell them those same lies,” I added.
“That is true,” said the therapist. “Birds of a feather do spend  
time together.”
“And so do liars,” I said.
The therapist chuckled and nodded in agreement.
“So I ask you once more, how is this bit of enlightened 
information useful?” I asked.
“Well, since anything you say about the future is technically a  
lie, why not tell lies about the kind of future you want rather than the 
kind of future you do not want?” replied the therapist.
I thought about what she had said in silence, as did the rest of the 
class. Finally I said, “Lie about the future on purpose?”
“Sure, we all do it. Some of us do it unconsciously or automatically.  
Let me ask you this: When it came to money, did your rich dad speak of 
the future positively?”
“Yes,” I said.
 “And did much of what he said come true?” she asked.
Again I said, “Yes.”
“And when it came to money and the future, did your poor dad 
speak negatively?”
“Yes,” I said.
“And did what he said come true?”
Retire Young Retire Rich337
I nodded my head.
“So both sets of lies came true,” said the therapist.
I just nodded, realizing that both men were lying about their 
future, and yet their lies came true. “So are you saying that I should lie 
about the future I want, rather than the future I don’t want?”
“Yes,” she said. “That is exactly what I am saying. In fact, I’ll bet 
you do it already. I’ll bet that when you were down and out, you kept 
telling your wife and close friends about how good the future was 
going to be and how much money you were going to make. You kept 
saying that, even though you had not a penny to your name.”
Chuckling, I said, “Yes I did. But I only told my lies to friends 
who loved and supported me. I never told my positive lies about my 
future to people who would put down my lies about the future.”
“Very wise of you,” said the therapist. “So what lies did you say to 
your wife during your darkest of financial hours?”
“You want me to tell the class?” I asked, becoming somewhat 
embarrassed.
“Yes. Tell the class what you really said when times were at  
their worst.”
I thought for a while and remembered a moment when Kim and 
I were at our lowest point financially. Slowly I said to the class, “I 
remember holding Kim tightly and saying, ‘Someday all of this will  
be behind us. Someday we’ll be rich beyond our wildest dreams.  
Today our problem is not enough money, but someday soon, our 
problem will be too much money.’”
“And has that come true?” asked the therapist.
“Yes, it has,” I replied. “More than we could have dreamed. I’m 
kind of embarrassed to say that today we have a big problem of too 
much money. I realize how poor a background I came from because 
today, Kim and I have a hard time trying to think of things we can 
buy. Much of our money goes to charity, but there is still plenty left 
and we need to stretch our reality on what to buy since we can afford 
almost anything. T rying to find things to buy beyond what we can 
afford is a very interesting process.”
Chapter Nineteen338
“Why do you think your lies came true?” she asked.
 “Because both dads insisted that I never make a promise I could 
not keep. And if I could not keep the promise, I should be the first 
one to inform the person I broke the promise with that the agreement 
could not be kept. Both dads stressed that we are only as good as our 
word, and both men were good to their word.”
20 Percent of All People Are Hard-Core Liars
“Very good,” said the therapist. “You see, 80 percent of all people 
are basically honest. About 20 percent are hard-core liars, and no 
matter what they do, they have to lie. So even if they lie positively 
about their financial future, it becomes a negative lie anyway, since 
hard-core liars have no integrity in their soul. But I have found that 
most people are honest, so even when they lie, their lies come true.” 
The therapist paused for a moment and then said, “Enough talking 
about lying. Let’s start learning how to lie positively about our futures. 
And remember, the purpose of this exercise is not to deceive, but to 
help each of us move to a new and better reality about ourselves.”
I agreed, and the therapist had the class get into pairs. “Now,” she 
said, “I want you to tell your partner the biggest and best lie about 
how rich you will be in the future. Tell them about the millions of 
dollars you receive each month from your real estate investments, the 
revenue from your oil company, and how big your mansion is.”
Some people had a difficult time telling exaggerated lies about 
their future financial success. Others were quite well rehearsed at 
the process. Nonetheless, in a matter of minutes, the energy in the 
room was up 100 percent, and the noise was deafening. There were 
outbreaks of hysterical laughter as people told gigantic and exaggerated 
fibs about their future. Most people really loved being granted 
permission to tell exaggerated stories about their future financial 
success. Many reported that their lives and their futures changed at 
that moment.
So hot tip #3 is, whenever you find yourself feeling down and 
telling negative lies about yourself and your financial future, find a 
Retire Young Retire Rich339
trusted friend and ask them if you can tell them a big fat lie about 
how financially successful you will be in the near future. I think you 
will find it great therapy and, who knows? The lie you tell about your 
financial future might someday come true.
If you are brave enough, do not wait till you feel down before 
you begin lying positively. As soon as possible, find a trusted friend or 
loved one and ask permission to allow you to tell them your great big 
lies about how fantastic your financial future will someday be.   
As I said, it can be great fun, and the lie you tell today might come 
true tomorrow.
The Home-Run King
The point is that your future is yet to be made. You may as well 
make it up today and make it up the way you want it to be, rather 
than what you’re afraid it might not be. Too many people go to the 
worst -case scenario, rather than the best-case scenario, when they 
think about changing their financial future. Worst or best, the future 
scenario is a lie anyway, at least according to the therapist. The great 
Babe Ruth had a habit of taking his bat and pointing it to the home-
run fence. It was his way of saying, “I’m going for the wall.” He did 
this continually, although he struck out more times than most people. 
Although he struck out the most, he never stopped pointing his bat at 
the far wall. Today he is known as the home-run king, not the strike-
out king.
The Boogeyman
When we were kids, many of us imagined a boogeyman hiding 
under our bed or in our closet. Some of us stayed up late at night when 
all the lights were out, shaking and worrying about this character that 
existed only in our minds. 
After we grow up, many of us replace the boogeyman with the 
bill collector or some other horrible financial disaster that has not yet 
happened. Regardless if it is the boogeyman or the bill collector, the 
results are the same. We lie awake at night worrying about things we 
really should not worry about. We also depress our future, telling lies 
Chapter Nineteen340
to ourselves about some financial disaster or calamity that has not yet 
occurred and may never occur.
So instead of waking up in the morning and acting like Babe Ruth 
pointing our home-run bat to the fence, we trundle off to a job, selling 
our precious lives for a few dollars, living with a false sense of financial 
security from some imaginary boogeyman, and asking ourselves,  
“What if this happens?” “What if that happens?” “What happens if... ?” 
The child may have become an adult, but the boogeyman still exists, and 
he continues to rob people of the wonderful possibilities of life. That 
is why this process of lying about your future can be a valuable one for 
honest people who want to move forward boldly, pointing their baseball 
bat to the far, far fence.
Rich dad said, “We all have good luck and bad luck. Unsuccessful 
people live lives doing nothing, avoiding bad luck and also avoiding 
good luck. It’s hard to have any kind of luck if you’re doing nothing, 
paralyzed by fear. A successful person is one who takes action and takes 
the good with the bad, knowing that he or she can turn bad luck into 
good luck.”
One day a reporter was asking me how I overcame my fear of 
failure and asked for some tips on the secret to my success. I thought 
for a moment and said, “My rich dad taught me to turn bad luck into 
good luck.” So for good luck, start with baby steps, and go for the life 
you dream of rather than live in fear of some imaginary nightmare. 
Don’t let the boogeyman steal your dreams. Be like Babe Ruth. Tell  
big lies about your future and boldly swing for the fence.
An important note:  Please remember that this tip is not a  
license to lie with the intent to deceive or cover up the truth.  
I would never endorse such a practice. The above recommendation 
is for honest people only, not for  habitual liars. If you are a 
habitual liar, please seek professional help and begin learning  
to tell the truth rather than lying.
Retire Young Retire Rich341
11 More Tips for You
In the introduction, I promised that I would provide a list of 
things that anyone could do to improve their chances of retiring young 
and retiring rich. Most of them have already been discussed, but a 
simple, condensed review list may be helpful.
These are things I do on a regular basis. These are things that have 
assisted me greatly in retiring young and retiring rich. I trust they can 
also be of use to you. Always remember that the process of retiring 
young and retiring rich is primarily a mental and emotional process. 
Once you begin that journey in your mind and in your heart, the rest 
of you should soon follow.
1. Decide.  
Every day I get up and I choose who and what I want to be. 
I ask myself, “Do I want to live today as a person with a poor 
context, a middle-class context, or a rich context?”
 Remember that a person with a poor context will say 
something like, “I’ll never be rich.” A person with a middle-
class context might say, “Job security is important.” A person 
with a rich context might say, “I need to increase my financial 
IQ so I can work less and make more money.”
2. Find a friend or loved one who wants to go on the journey 
with you.  
I know that I would not have made it without my wife, Kim, 
and without my friends. Be sure to have friends who demand 
more of you, rather than tell you why you cannot do what you 
want to do.
 Choosing the right friends or life partners is very important 
to a successful life. If you have friends or family who are not 
committed to improving their financial IQ, life can be a long 
financial struggle, regardless of how much money you make.
Chapter Nineteen342
3. Seek competent advice and begin building your own team 
of financial and legal advisors.  
Always remember what rich dad said, “Your most expensive 
advice is the free advice you receive from your financially 
struggling friends and relatives.” Rich dad later expanded his 
statement to include financial advisors who do not practice what 
they preach or do not buy the investment products they sell you. 
Again, choosing the right people is a very important skill. People 
can be either assets or liabilities.
 One day rich dad said to me, “If your car is broken, you take it to 
a trained mechanic to fix. The moment you pick up the car, you 
know whether or not the mechanic was a good mechanic or not. 
The problem with these so-called professional financial advisors is 
that you will not know if they gave you good advice or bad advice 
until years later. What happens if you begin taking a financial 
advisor’s advice at age 25, and you don’t find out your financial 
advisor was giving you bad advice until age sixty-five? You can’t 
take your ruined financial life back to the financial advisor like 
you can take your broken car back to the mechanic. I trust auto 
mechanics and used-car salesmen more than I do most financial 
advisors, simply because I can see the results of their work faster. 
The reason most people end up poor or middle class is because 
they spend more time selecting a used car than they spend time 
looking for good financial advice.”
 The point is, be very careful about the advice you place in  
your head. 
4. Set a retirement date.   
Sit down with your loved ones and  your advisors, and set a 
date for your early retirement. This is like Babe Ruth pointing 
his bat at the far wall. If you will actually do this process and 
discuss an actual date with these people, your present context 
will begin to argue with your future context. It is a great and 
fun process to go through. You will definitely hear many 
different realities and different contexts.
Retire Young Retire Rich343
 Hold quarterly meetings with this group, and continue to 
discuss your early retirement date.
5. Write down a plan on a piece of paper once you have set the 
date for your early retirement.  
Put that plan on your refrigerator so you have to look at it 
every day. Update the plan as you progress and learn more  
and more.
 When Kim and I spent that week up on Whistler Mountain, 
frozen in the snow, the plan we came up with changed the 
direction of our lives. That is the power of a plan. The point is, 
just because you may be poor today does not mean you have 
to be poor tomorrow. Becoming rich and staying rich requires 
a plan and the determination to follow it, one day at a time. 
Kim and I followed our plan one day at a time for nearly ten 
years. As I said, today our problem is that we have too much 
money, and we struggle to find ways to spend it wisely. It may 
be a struggle, but it’s the kind of struggle I like and want you 
to have also.
6. Plan your early retirement party.  
Be excessive and be lavish. Once you can retire early, money 
will no longer be a problem. Even if you do not achieve your 
goal, you will have great fun going through this process. 
And who knows? You might even have to throw that early-
retirement party early!
7. Look at a deal a day.  
Remember—it costs you nothing to go shopping.
 The point is to do something every day to improve your 
financial intelligence for at least ten minutes a day. It may be 
something as simple as reading one article from the money 
or business section of your online news site, even if you are 
not interested in it. It will begin to improve your vocabulary. 
Listen to financial or business information recordings while you 
Chapter Nineteen344
drive or work out at the gym. Attend a financial seminar at least 
once a year. If you do not want to pay for a seminar, just look 
in the financial section of your local newspaper, and you will 
find many free investment seminars. Even if you do not learn 
anything, you are bound to meet other people just like you.
8. Remember that all markets follow three main trends:       
up, down, and sideways.  
Some markets go up, down, and sideways over years. 
Sometimes markets can trend up, down, and sideways in less 
than a minute. That is why, when someone advises you to 
“Invest for the long term,” ask them what they mean. Ask 
them for a more detailed explanation. Most financial advisors 
are simply parroting what they have been taught by their sales 
manager, so they may have difficulty explaining what they say.
 One of the best ways to get rich is at the point where a trend 
changes. There is a lot of truth to that old saying, “Being at the 
right place at the right time.” If you will look at deals daily, you 
will better sense changes and improve your chances of being 
at the right place at the right time. For example, if you had 
entered the stock market in 1991 and invested a lot of money 
in technology stocks you would be rich today. But when the 
trend changed down in March of 2000, if you did not change 
your strategy, you would have lost all that you had gained. If 
you had changed strategy in March of 2000, you would have 
made money faster on the way down, increasing your wealth 
instead of losing it. 
 That is why, if you want to get rich and stay rich, you must 
be aware of trends and have three different strategies for three 
different trends. I have met many people who made money on 
one trend, and went bankrupt when the trend changed.
Retire Young Retire Rich345
Buy High, Sell Low
The June 2001 issue of Forbes  magazine ran an interesting article. 
The headline read, “ Buy High, Sell Low. What you always knew:   
Analysts are great advisors if you do the opposite.”  Quoting the article:
New research by four California professors shows that, not only 
would you have lost money buying stocks that analysts pushed last 
year, but you would have made money if you bought those they 
recommended selling. And not just a small return. You would 
have made 38 percent on your money, better than the S&P 500 
has done since 1958.
In another article from Fortune  magazine entitled “Is Wall Street 
Serious About Reform?” the writer, Shawn T ully, seems to agree. That 
article reads: 
On a humid morning in June, Representative Richard Baker, a 
homespun Republican from Louisiana, opened a dramatic congressional 
hearing by hammering a theme that stirs everyone from bartenders  
to soccer moms. Call it, “How Wall Street Screws the Little Guy.”  
In a molasses drawl, Baker voiced his outrage at how the Street’s  
new aristocrats-securities analysts fleece small shareholders.
In my opinion, most analysts and financial advisors are not 
professional investors. They do not know what a professional investor 
must know. So most advice about investing is good advice for the 
average investor, but the same advice is bad advice for the professional 
investor, especially if you want to get rich and stay rich.
A professional investor knows that the trend is your friend. A 
professional investor is someone who knows that no one is strong 
enough to go against the trend. As kids surfing, we always had 
tremendous respect for the changes in the trends or mood of the 
ocean. It was the tourist, who came only knowing what swimming in 
a lake or pool was like, who got into trouble in the ocean, some even 
drowning. You must respect the trends, just as a surfer respects the 
power of the ocean.  
Chapter Nineteen346
When someone says to you, “Invest for the long term,” ask them 
what they mean by “long term.” Long term means one thing to the 
average investor, and something else to a professional investor. If you 
want to get rich and stay rich, you cannot be an average long-term 
investor. You must be a professional investor who is far better educated 
than the average investor.
One of the problems with following your parents’ advice on money 
is that technology and financial IQ are changing faster than most people 
can change. Today, it is possible to get rich and stay rich if you stay 
abreast of the changes in technology and financial intelligence. 
For example, in the world of options, there are new options 
coming out today that are called “knockout options.” They are far 
faster than the standard puts and calls that most day-traders are using 
today. The reason most people do not know about knockout options 
is because they were invented by foreign-exchange or foreign-currency 
traders. In a few years, these new “exotic options,” as they are called, 
will begin to filter into the stock market. Without going into much 
detail, simply put, a knockout option means you can make more 
money, faster, and safer than with standard options. 
Just remember this, as we make advances in technology, so will 
humans make advances in financial intelligence. That means it’s 
getting easier and easier to become rich quicker with more safety. The 
catch? You need to keep up and keep learning and get good advisors.
Old Dogs Learn New Tricks
As you may have guessed, I love  Forbes  magazine. In the May 
2001 issue of Forbes Global , their magazine for international 
businesspeople and investors, there was an interesting article about 
Sir John Templeton. Sir John Templeton is known as a value investor, 
investing globally in undervalued stocks and watching them grow. The 
Forbes  article, entitled “Old Dog, New T ricks,” describes how even 
Templeton, a hard-core bull and fundamental investor, learned to be 
a technical trader investing into a bear market. The article talks about 
how, in the year 2000, instead of investing for the long term, which  
 
Retire Young Retire Rich347
he used to advise, he went short for the first time. It was a new way of 
investing for him. In one year, he made over $86 million by learning a 
new way of investing.
As rich dad said, “Money is just an idea.” In this day and age, you 
do need to keep coming up with new ideas. If Sir John Templeton can 
change his context at 88 years of age, so can you.
While the average investor was listening to their financial advisors 
about investing for the long term, the real investors were changing 
strategy and going short. Millions of investors going long ultimately 
lost trillions of dollars. Can this happen again? Most certainly. That is, 
if you want to get rich and stay rich, you need to be careful about who 
is giving you your financial advice.
9. Always remember that words are free. 
 If you want to get rich, you need a rich vocabulary. Always 
remember that there are four basic classes of assets: business, 
paper assets, real estate, and commodities. Each of these assets 
uses different words. Each of these assets is like a foreign 
country with a foreign language. Begin to learn the vocabulary 
or the jargon of the asset class you are interested in. Once you 
learn the words, you will be better able to communicate to 
yourself and others in that asset class.
Words are the most powerful tools we have as human beings,  
so choose your words carefully. Always remember that there are 
two basic types of words:
• One type is content words. 
For example, “internal rate of return” is an important 
group of words, especially for real estate investors who use 
a lot of leverage to invest with. Internal rates of return are 
content words.
• The second type is context words. 
For example, when someone says, “I’ll never understand 
internal rates of return,” this person is describing their mental 
context about the content words.
Chapter Nineteen348
Be aware of constantly improving your content vocabulary and 
watching your context vocabulary because words are the tools 
that power one of your most powerful assets—your brain. That 
is why I suggest you forbid yourself from ever saying, “I can’t 
afford it,” or “I can’t do it,” or “I could never learn that.” 
Ask yourself instead, “How can I afford it?” or “How can I do 
it?” or “How can I learn it?”
Remember that a big difference between a rich person and a 
poor person is simply the quality of their words. Your financial 
IQ begins with your financial vocabulary. So watch your words 
because words do become flesh and do become your future. If 
you want to retire young and retire rich, your words hold the 
key... and words are free.
10. Talk about money.  
When I was in China and Japan, many people came up to 
me and said, “In Asian culture, it is not polite to talk about 
money, so we never talk about it.” When I am in America or 
Australia or Europe, many people say a similar thing. They say, 
“In our family, we did not discuss money.”
 So the hot tip is to talk about money. If your friends don’t 
want to talk about it, you may want to find a new group of 
friends. In my group of friends, we talk about money, business, 
investing, successes, and problems. Most of my friends are 
also very rich and do not have the context that talking about 
money is evil or dirty. Kim and I talk about money constantly. 
To us, making money, getting rich, and having an abundant 
lifestyle is fun. And we enjoy the game of money so we talk 
about money. We enjoy the game of money just as people 
enjoy other sports. Because we have money as a game in 
common, our marriage is closer, educational, exciting, and 
fun. Money is a subject all people all over the world have in 
common, so why not talk about it?
Retire Young Retire Rich349
11. Make a million dollars starting with nothing. 
 One of the reasons I do not need a job or a paycheck is because 
rich dad trained me to make money from nothing.
 One of the saddest things I see today is people not knowing 
how to make money out of nothing. The other day, a young 
woman applied for a job in one of my companies. She came 
from a large multinational corporation where she was a senior 
vice president of marketing. She had been downsized and 
wanted to try her hand as vice president of marketing in my 
small entrepreneurial company. So, as a test, I asked her to 
prepare a media budget for this company. She came back three 
days later with a budget of $1.6 million for the year.
  “$1.6 million,” I gasped. “That is a lot of money.”
 “I realize that,” she said in her most big corporate tone,  
“but if you want to achieve the result you want, that is what  
 it will cost.”
 “I am willing to pay that,” I replied. “But before I agree to 
this budget, tell me how we could achieve the same result for 
$160,000,  or even nothing.”
 “Oh, you can’t do that,” she said in her haughty corporate 
tone. “You have to spend money to make money.”
 Needless to say, she did not get the job. We obviously 
come from a different reality or context. The success of my 
companies is because rich dad taught his son and me how to 
make millions out of nothing, or virtually nothing.
The point is, it saddens me to see grown, highly paid executives of 
major corporations know how to spend a lot of money, but not really 
know how to make a lot of money on their own. I sit on boards of a few 
public companies, and I watch these executives churn through investors’ 
money but not be able to turn a profit.
Rich dad often said, “There are big differences between entrepreneurs 
and bureaucrats. Most people are bureaucrats because our schools train 
Chapter Nineteen350
people to become bureaucrats. An entrepreneur must know how to be 
both. Many bureaucrats dream of becoming entrepreneurs, but most 
never will.” Rich dad said, “A bureaucrat only knows how to make money 
if it is given to him. An entrepreneur can make money out of nothing.”
A few months ago, I was sitting with an executive of a large 
international publishing house. He had just come from one of my talks 
on entrepreneurship and how to grow a business. He looked me straight 
in the eye and said, “I will never be rich because it takes a lot of money 
to make money. I have a $20-million advertising budget, and I need 
every dollar of it to produce the sales volume I want.” At that moment, 
I knew why he was a bureaucrat of a large corporation and not an 
entrepreneur. His reality will forever keep him there.
It also saddens me to see small companies not able to grow because 
the entrepreneur does not know how to make money out of nothing or 
next to nothing. Rich dad said, “There is a big difference between a “baby 
business” and a small business. A baby business has the potential to grow 
into a big business in the B quadrant. A small business may be profitable, 
but it has no potential of growing into a B-quadrant business.” Rich dad 
went on to explain that the difference was not found in the business, but 
in the mindset of the entrepreneur behind the business. 
A classic example is the story of the McDonald brothers and Ray 
Kroc. Ray Kroc took a small hamburger stand run by two brothers and 
turned it into the very, very, very big worldwide business we know today 
as McDonald’s. Ray Kroc was an E-quadrant employee selling milk-
shake mixers. He bought an S-quadrant business from the McDonald 
brothers and turned it into a big B-quadrant business. 
That is the power of this simple process I will share with you now, a 
process you can do on a regular basis and it will cost you nothing—but 
it could make you rich beyond your wildest dreams.
So the last tip is, with your loved one or friends who are on the 
journey with you, spend time together brainstorming how you can 
take an idea and turn that idea into millions of dollars, starting with 
no money or very little money. This process is like going to the gym for 
your muscles. This regular exercise strengthens your brain and gets it 
ready for the moment you make your move.
Retire Young Retire Rich351
Before I met Kim, I would sit in a coffee shop with some friends 
on the ground floor of the office building where the Xerox office was 
located. We would spend hours over many cups of coffee coming up 
with ideas on how to make millions of dollars out of nothing. We came 
up with some really good ideas, some bad ideas, and many, many stupid 
ideas. We came up with T-shirt ideas, puzzles made out of wood, a 
tourist product involving sugar packets from Hawaii, and a financial 
newsletter. Most of those ideas never got off the ground, yet they gave us 
great mental exercise. Even though most of the ideas did not work, we 
did come up with the nylon-and-Velcro surfer-wallet idea. We took that 
idea and turned it into millions of dollars. Unfortunately, we didn’t take 
the steps to protect the idea and ended up losing it to competition.
The capitalization of the Coca-Cola company was over $8 billion, 
but the value of the Coca-Cola brand is closer to $80 billion, almost 
ten times the capitalization of the entire company. How is that 
possible? Coca-Cola has aggressively protected its intellectual property 
internationally and, as a result, the Coca-Cola brand has become 
incredibly valuable.
 
 “Rich Dad” Is Just Two Words
Let’s review the success of just two words: “Rich Dad.”
When Kim and I started our company in 1997, the words “rich 
dad” were just two meaningless words and worth nothing.
Today, the words “Rich Dad” are worth hundreds of millions of 
dollars. How did that happen? We took the time to create a strategy to 
intentionally build intellectual-property assets. We made sure that we 
protected our inventions with patents. We have created and protected 
strong “Rich Dad” and “CASHFLOW” brands and have a strong trade 
dress that is recognizable all over the world. The initial trademark cost 
us less than $1,000 to file. Our experience proves that you can make 
money with little to no money.
Chapter Nineteen352
In Conclusion
You and I know that your brain is still your most underused asset. 
It has plenty of horsepower yet to be used. Rich dad used to say, “Lazy 
people want to get rich quickly, and successful people want to get 
financially smart quickly and keep getting smarter.” The point is, if you 
want to retire young and retire rich and you don’t have much money, 
education, or experience, begin using your brain. In my reality, it does 
not take money to become rich. In my reality, it does take mental and 
emotional power. All the hot tips listed are there for you to consider 
and practice if you want.
The final point of all these tips is that none of them requires much 
time or money, but they will help you retire young and retire rich 
if you do them regularly and faithfully. Always remember that your 
future is determined by what you do today, not tomorrow.
If you will faithfully make some of these simple exercises a part of 
your everyday life, you may find yourself going through the looking 
glass and into a completely different world. And that is the subject of 
the next section.
You Are Already an Expert
As you may already realize, it is not so much what you do that 
makes you rich or poor. It is more the context surrounding what you 
do that makes you rich or poor. That is why, when people ask me 
what I do or what I invest in, I reply, “Please don’t ask me what I do. 
Ask me what I think about what I do.” For example, many people 
invest in stocks, but only a few people become rich investing in 
stocks. The same is true for real estate or building a business. What 
is the difference? I say it is the context surrounding the actions or 
content. I have met people who say to me, “Real estate is a lousy 
investment. I have not made any money in it.” Well, in my opinion, 
it is not real estate that is the lousy investment. It is the person who 
is a lousy investor. A person with a rich investor’s context can take a 
bad investment and turn it into a rich investment. In fact, that is what 
most rich investors do.
Retire Young Retire Rich353
Use Debt in Your Favor
The same is true with the subject of debt. Most people know how 
to get into debt. Most people are experts at getting into debt. The 
problem is, they get into debt and get poorer. Most people take good 
debt and make it bad. As rich dad said to me, “All debt is good debt. 
But not all people know how to use debt, so they turn good debt into 
bad debt.”
If you want to be rich, you first need to work on your context 
more than on what you do. As rich dad said, “Most people already 
know how to get into debt. The problem is, they do not know how to 
use debt in their favor. If someone wants to get rich using debt, they 
first need to change their context. Then they can use debt to become 
very rich.” If you cannot change your poor or middle-class person’s 
context regarding the subject of debt, it is best that you cut up your 
credit cards, pay off your house as quickly as possible, and just try and 
save money.
If you want to retire young and retire rich, you must first change 
your context. That is why I recommend you occasionally review these 
hot tips and continually work on upgrading your context. If you have 
a rich person’s context, you will become richer and richer no matter 
what you do. If you have a poor person’s context, no matter what you 
study or what you do, the results will be the same—a poor person’s 
results. Remember, it is your context, or what you think is real, that 
becomes your reality, regardless of what you do. As rich dad said, 
“Debt does not necessarily make you poor, but a poor or middle-class 
context will.”

Chapter Twenty
DIFFERENT REALITIES355
The following is an optional exercise that you can do if you are 
brave enough. These questions are to be asked at your next dinner 
party or over lunch with co-workers, friends, and family. The reason  
I say that it is optional is because the following questions will bring up 
different realities about money from the people you ask.
If you give the person time to fully answer each question, you will 
hear many different realities, reasons, excuses, lies, assumptions, and 
other psychobabble that people have about money and their lives. You 
may hear such responses as, “What a stupid question.” “Who does this 
guy think he is?” “You can’t do that.” “That’s impossible.” “I love my 
work. I’ll never stop working.” Rather than agreeing or disagreeing 
with the answers or comments to the questions, simply listen and see 
if you can more clearly pick up the person’s reality about money and 
his or her financial life. If you have the courage to ask these questions 
of your loved ones, friends, or co-workers, I wish you luck. If you do 
the exercise with other people, I think you will learn a tremendous 
amount about the power of one’s reality over those people’s financial 
condition in life. 
What Kind of Life Do You Want to Live?
The following are the questions or groups of questions to ask:
• If you had all the money in the world and never had to work 
again, what would you do with your free time?
Chapter T wenty356
• If you (and your spouse if married) stopped working today, 
what would happen to your life? How long could you survive 
and still maintain your standard of living and lifestyle?
• At what age will you be able to retire if you are not already 
retired? Would you like to retire earlier? When you retire, will 
you be making more money than you are today or less?
• Would you rather live a life where you no longer need a 
paycheck, or would you rather live a life where you’re always 
working at or looking for a higher-paying job? Would you 
rather be unemployable or more employable? Which life are 
you leading today?
• Do you want to live a life where you work hard trying to 
spend more money because you have too much money, or live 
a life working hard trying to save money? Which life are you 
leading?
• Would you rather live a life where you do not have to work 
hard to earn more, or would you rather live a life where you 
have to work harder to earn more? Which life are you living?
• Do you think investing is risky? Do you think it takes money 
to make money? Would you like to be able to invest without 
any money and without much risk for very high returns? If you 
could invest with someone else’s money, would you?
• Who are the six people other than your family that you spend 
the most time around? What is their attitude toward money? 
Is it rich, poor, or middle class? Of those six people, how many 
will be able to retire young and retire rich? Is it time for you to 
make new friends?
• Would you rather live a life where you work to become rich 
building or buying assets, or would you rather live a life 
working for job security and a steady paycheck? Which life are 
you living?
Retire Young Retire Rich357
• If you were offered a billion dollars to quit your job, would 
you? If a billion dollars is more important than your job, why 
not go for the billion dollars? What specifically holds you back? 
If you would not quit your job for a billion dollars, then why 
not? Could you not use the billion dollars to do more good 
than you are doing now?
• Do you live a life where you make money regardless if the 
market goes up or down, or do you live a life where you live 
in fear of market crashes and losing money? Which life do you 
live? Why?
• Regarding the subject of money, if you could do things 
differently, what would you do differently? If there is 
something you would do differently, why aren’t you doing it?
A Comparison of Realities
The reason I suggest this exercise only if you are brave enough is 
because, after the discussion, you may wind up without any friends 
and need to make new ones. If you find your family, friends, and co-
workers are not coming from the context you want to come from, then 
go meet people who are. 
The most important thing is that you will see the different realities 
and different worlds different people come from when it comes to the 
subject of money. As rich dad said, “Money is just an idea.” When 
you ask these questions, you will find out many different ideas and 
different realities.
The most important thing from this exercise is to listen to different 
thoughts and realities, and decide what kind of reality or financial 
world you want to see. Having two dads allowed me to see both 
worlds, and I made my choice which world I wanted to see. So the 
choice is up to you. If you ask these questions of your family and 
friends, you will hear their ideas. After listening to their ideas, then 
you can begin to better choose the ideas you want and what kind of 
life you want to live.
 
359
Rich dad said, “The first step is to decide what kind of 
world you want to live in. Do you want to live in the world 
of the poor, the middle class, or the rich?”
“Wouldn’t most people choose to live in the world of the 
rich?” I asked.
“No,” said rich dad. “Most people dream of living in the 
world of the rich, but they do not take that first step, and 
that is to decide. Once you decide, and if you have truly 
decided, there is no coming back. The moment you decide, 
everything in your world will change.”Section Four  
THE LEVERAGE OF 
YOUR FIRST STEP

Chapter Twenty-One
HOW TO KEEP GOING361
I am frequently asked, “After you made the decision to retire 
young, what kept Kim and you going? How did you handle the 
adversity and not turn back when times got tough?” Most of the time, 
I answer with cliches such as “determination, strong will, and vision.” 
I use such overused cliches because I rarely have the time to explain 
much of what I have already explained in this book. Since you have 
read this far and hopefully understood most of what has been written 
to this point, I will share with you in greater depth a more honest 
explanation of what kept us going.
T wo of the more profound fairy-tale type of stories rich dad 
had me read were the classics by Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in 
Wonderland  and Through the Looking Glass . Both stories share the 
journey into different realities. In Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland , 
Alice follows the White Rabbit down its burrow and into a different 
world, a world that reminds me of the financial-services industry. 
In Through the Looking Glass , Alice again journeys to another reality 
behind the looking glass. Behind the looking glass, Alice finds 
looking-glass books that cannot be read unless held up to a mirror, 
much like a personal financial statement. Nonetheless, to rich dad, 
the value of both stories was the idea of traveling from one reality to 
another. Rich dad said, “The problem is that most people live only 
one reality and tend to think that their reality is the only reality.”
Chapter T wenty-One362
Answering a Frequently Asked Question
Most of the time, when asked such a question as, “What kept 
you and Kim going? How did you keep going when you were out of 
money, out of a job, and on a financial losing streak?” I answer with 
tried and true simple cliches. I reply with, “It took determination,” or 
“We knew we were never going back.” But those cliches do not tell the 
real story. I hesitate beginning the true explanation because the answer 
is out of the reality of most people, so I just say very little.
Not long ago in a seminar, I had the time to more fully explain the 
reason Kim and I kept going. Since you have read this far, I will tell 
you the answer I shared with the class. I do not think it fully answers 
the question of how we kept going, but I think the answer will give 
you a little extra food for thought.
As the seminar drew to a close, a student raised his hand and 
asked, “When it seemed the darkest, what kept you and Kim going?  
I want to hear the real reason, not the ones you have given us so far.”
The Answer
I considered his request for a while and finally decided to disclose 
our driving motivation to keep going, once Kim and I had made our 
decision to retire young and retire rich. The explanation began:
“In my late twenties, rich dad imparted a lesson that began with 
this question. The lesson and dialogue lasted for years. Even though he 
is gone, I continue to review the lesson and seek further answers.”
A World of No Risk That Requires No Money
“What would you do if there were no risk and it required no 
money to become rich?” asked rich dad.
“No risk and no money?” I repeated, not certain where rich dad 
was going with this question. “Why ask the question?” I finally asked. 
“Such a world does not exist.”
Rich dad let me sit with my answer for a moment. His silence 
was my cue that I had best listen to my answer and take the time to 
Retire Young Retire Rich363
rethink it. Once he knew I had rethought my answer, he finally said, 
“Are you sure such a world does not exist?”
“A world of no risk and no money required?” I asked, seeking  
to make sure we were discussing the same points. All I could hear  
was my own dad saying, “Investing is risky,” and “It takes money to 
make money.”
Rich dad nodded his head. “Yes. What would you do if such a 
world existed?”
 “Well, I would go find it,” I said, “but only if it existed.”
“And why would it not exist?” asked rich dad.
“Because it’s impossible,” I replied. “How could there be a world 
where there was no monetary risk or money required to become rich?”
“Well, if you have already decided that it is impossible for such a 
world to exist, then it cannot exist,” rich dad said softly.
“Are you saying it does exist?” I asked.
“It does not matter what I think. What is important is what you 
think,” said rich dad. “If you say it does not exist, it does not exist. 
What I think is inconsequential.”
“But such a world is impossible,” I repeated. “I know it is 
impossible. There has to be risk.”
“Then it does not exist,” shrugged rich dad. “If you think it is 
impossible, then it’s impossible.” Rich dad was now answering me with 
a little more energy and a hint of frustration in the tone of his voice. 
“The reason such a world does not exist is because you still have your 
dad’s reality and his beliefs. You cling to those beliefs because that is 
the reality you were raised in. I cannot teach you much more unless 
you are willing to change that reality. I can give you more and more 
answers about how to become rich, but my answers are no good if you 
cling to your family’s reality on money and how life is.”
“But no money and no risk? Come on,” I said. “Be real. No one 
believes there is a world of no money and no risk.”
“I know,” said rich dad. “That is why so many people cling to job 
security and often assume investing is risky or that it takes money to 
Chapter T wenty-One364
make money. They do not question their assumptions. They do not 
challenge their assumptions. Instead they believe their assumptions are 
real, never asking if there might be another reality or maybe a different 
assumption. You cannot become richer if you do not first question  
the assumptions under your beliefs. That is why so few people become 
rich or ever become truly financially free. But you’re still not answering 
the question.”
“So repeat the question,” I replied, feeling very frustrated and 
wondering what he meant by not questioning my assumptions.
“The question was, ‘What would you do if there were no risk, 
and it required no money to become rich?’” rich dad said, repeating 
himself slowly and deliberately, doing his best to get through my 
reaction so I could hear the question.
“I still think it is a ridiculous question, but I’ll answer anyway,”  
I replied.
 “Why do you say it’s ridiculous?” asked rich dad.
“Because such a world does not exist,” I snapped back. “It’s a silly 
question and a waste of time. Why should I even answer or think 
about such a question?”
“Okay,” said rich dad. “I got my answer. I also hear your 
underlying assumption. To you, it’s a waste of time to even think 
about such a world so you would not bother to think about the 
question. You already assume such a world does not exist so you think 
questioning that idea is a waste of time. You don’t want to question 
your assumption. So because you don’t think such a world exists, you 
don’t want to think about it. You only want to think the way you have 
always thought. You want to become rich, but live in fear of losing 
money or live with the idea that you don’t have enough money. To 
me, that is a strange reality, but I can accept your answer. I understand 
your assumptions, because they are very common assumptions.”
“No, no, no,” I said. “I’ll answer your question. I’m just asking 
you if you are saying that such a world exists,” I said, raising my voice, 
becoming angry and defensive.
Rich dad sat quietly, again not answering my question and letting 
me listen to myself. He was letting me listen to my reality.
Retire Young Retire Rich365
“Do you want me to believe that world exists?” I asked heatedly.
“Let me repeat myself. It does not matter what I believe,” said rich 
dad. “It’s what you believe.”
“Okay, okay, okay,” I said. “If such a world existed, a world 
without financial risk and a world that did not require me to use  
any money to become rich, then I would be richer beyond my wildest 
dreams. I would not be afraid. I would not make the excuse that  
I don’t have any money or that I might fail. I would live in a world of 
infinite abundance, a world where I could have anything I wanted.  
I would live in a completely different world, definitely not a world I 
was brought up in.”
“So if such a world existed, would it be worth the journey?” asked 
rich dad.
“Of course,” I replied sharply. “Who wouldn’t make the journey?”
Rich dad just shrugged his shoulders in silence, again letting me 
listen to my own words.
“Are you saying such a world exists?” I asked again.
“That is for you to decide. You can decide what kind of world 
exists. I can’t do that for you,” said rich dad. “I made my decision  
years ago as to what kind of world I wanted to have exist.”
 “Did you find your world?” I asked.
Rich dad never answered the question. His only reply was,  
“Do you remember the story of Alice and the looking glass?” 
I nodded my head.
“Years ago, I went through the looking glass. If you believe such 
a world exists, then you may decide to make the journey through the 
looking glass. But you will only make the journey if you believe the 
possibility that such a world exists. If you don’t believe it exists, then 
you will only see a mirror, and you will stay on this side of the mirror, 
looking at you looking at you looking at you looking at you.”
Chapter T wenty-One366
My Answer to the Class
When I shared this story with the class, it was silent. I do not 
know if my answer was making any sense. Regardless if it made sense 
or not, I had given them the story behind the story. Wrapping up 
the answer, I said, “So that is when my journey began. After that 
conversation with rich dad, I became very curious. I thought about 
what he said for several years. The more I thought about it, the more 
what he said became a possibility. When I was in my early thirties, 
I knew I had to push my reality. I knew my school days with rich 
dad were over. I knew rich dad could not teach me much more or 
give me any more answers until I decided to change my reality and 
begin my journey. More answers were not going to help. I needed 
a new expanded reality. I knew it was time to leave the nest, as they 
say. I did not know if such a world existed, but I wanted it to exist. 
So my journey began once I made the decision that such a world was 
possible. With that decision, I went looking for that world, a world 
where there is no risk and a world that does not take money to make 
money. I was tired of looking in the mirror and not liking what I saw. 
That is when I went looking for a world through the looking glass.”
The class remained silent. I could sense that some of them were 
open to the idea, and some were fighting it. A student raised his hand 
and said, “So you believed such a world existed? Is that what you’re 
telling us?”
I did not answer his question. Instead, I just continued on with 
the story. “Soon after making the decision that such a world might be 
possible, I met Kim and told her of the journey I was embarking on. 
For some reason she wanted to come along. She said, ‘Well, what you 
talk about beats the reality I have right now, the reality of working at 
a job all my life. I don’t like my current reality so I’m willing to find a 
new reality.’”
The student who was trying to get me to answer his question 
finally put his hand down and just listened. “Kim was the first woman 
I met who was willing to entertain such a crazy thought. I was hesitant 
about telling her, yet she did not fight my ideas. Instead, she listened 
Retire Young Retire Rich367
for days as I told her of the world I thought might be possible. That 
was when our journey began. It was not about money, but more about 
a search for a different world. So I faithfully say to you all that, more 
than anything else, it was the search for that world that kept Kim and 
me going.
“Once we made the decision, we began our journey through the 
looking glass. We knew that once we started the journey we needed to be 
brave, be humble, study, keep learning, learn quickly as lessons appeared, 
and most importantly, we kept pushing our reality, for we knew the 
journey was a journey only in our hearts and in our minds. We knew 
the journey had little to do with the world outside of us, and everything 
to do with the realities inside of us. When times got really bad, it was 
this search of a different reality, a different world, that ultimately kept us 
going. Once the journey began, we knew we were never turning back. 
That search for a different world is what kept us going.”
There was a long silence in the room. Suddenly, a student shot her 
hand up in the air and asked, “So did you find it? Tell me if you found 
it. If it does exist, I want to go there. I don’t want to spend 50 years 
of my life working for money. I don’t want to spend a lifetime taking 
orders from money, living in fear of not having enough money. Tell me 
if another type of world exists.”
I paused for a moment, doing to them as rich dad had done to 
me years and years ago, allowing them the time to listen to their 
own realities. “That is for you to decide,” I finally responded after an 
extended silence. “It is not what I believe. It is what you believe exists. 
If you think such a world exists for you, then you’ll go through the 
looking glass. If not, then you’ll stay on this side of the looking glass, 
looking at you looking at you. When it comes to money, you have the 
power to decide what is real and what kind of reality you want to live 
in.” The class was over. Most of the class was in deep thought. As I 
finished packing my briefcase, I turned to them and said, “Thank you 
for your attention. Thank you for listening. Class is dismissed.”

IN CLOSING369
In the fall of 1994, Kim and I took an extended break in Fiji. A friend 
had recommended this small exclusive resort on a small, private island. 
Before the sun came up one morning, a staff member from the hotel 
greeted us at our luxurious grass hut. “Your horses are ready,” he said with 
a smile and in a whisper.
We had been on the island for five days at this point. I was finally 
relaxing, winding down, and becoming more in sync with the slow 
gentle pace of this beautiful island paradise, surrounded by the crystal 
blue waters of the Pacific Ocean. It had been nine years since Kim and I 
had sat on Whistler Mountain, north of Vancouver, British Columbia, 
covered in snow, freezing, and creating our plans for financial freedom. 
As I climbed up on my horse, I reflected back to that time on the cold 
freezing mountain. Settling in the saddle, I thought about how different 
things now were in our lives. We were not shivering with cold anymore, 
and we were not poor with no money anymore. More important than just 
having a lot of money, we were now free. We never had to work again for 
the rest of our lives.
The horses slowly wandered along the trail that paralleled the 
beautiful white sand beach that surrounded the island. Although I could 
not see anything since it was still dark, I could hear the ocean just a few 
feet away and feel the ocean’s breeze as the horse gently navigated the 
narrow beach trail. The smell of the island soil and the tropical plants 
combined with the salt air, took me back to my childhood in Hawaii, to 
a time when Hawaii was still Hawaii. Although the horse ride was a short 
one, the memories that came back spanned a lifetime.
In Closing370
After a half-hour ride, the staff member from the hotel stopped 
the horses and assisted us to the ground. In the near distance, I could 
see several candles dancing in the wind. The guide took our hands and 
gently walked us toward the candles. The candles were sitting on a 
white tablecloth on a table in the sand, just a few feet from the gently 
lapping waves. The staff member sat Kim and me at the only table in 
the most beautiful restaurant in the world. As soon as we were seated, 
another staff member appeared with a bottle of my wife’s favorite 
champagne. Through the candlelight, Kim and I toasted ourselves and 
our journey. Never in my life had I felt more love for my beautiful 
wife. She had stuck by me through some of the most trying times of 
my life. We did not say anything. We silently reached across the tiny 
table and held each other’s hand, held our champagne glasses in the 
other hand, and said, “Thank you and I love you,” with our eyes. We 
had made it.
As if on cue, the glow of the sun peaked over the ocean’s horizon 
and we began to see nature’s masterpiece surrounding us. On one side, 
we could see the lush green island rising from the sea. In front of us 
was pristine white sand, and behind us were tall green trees with birds 
beginning to call out. Across the sand, seeming to bring all things 
together, was a calm blue ocean stretching away from the beach and 
greeting the sun.
The waiter brought our breakfast of fresh tropical fruits as we sat 
silently watching the sun rise out of the water, slowly illuminating 
the beauty that surrounded us. Except for the waiter, we were the 
only people there. There was perfect silence, except for the sounds 
of nature. There were no neighbors, no cars, no beachgoers, no loud 
music, no cell phones. Best of all, there was no business to go back to. 
No meetings. No deadlines. No budgets. The business was gone. It had 
done its job, and we had sold it. We had nothing to go home to except 
our freedom. All there was at that moment was Kim and me and the 
overwhelming beauty of nature—God’s magnificent creation.
Just as the sun finally broke free of the water, something snapped 
inside my head. My vision did not blur. It just seemed to vibrate, 
Guide To Investing371
and then the rest of me shook very briefly. It was a tiny earthquake, 
a tremor had suddenly moved through my body and my soul. 
Something was changing deep inside of me. The experience caused 
me to loosen up even more. As the warmth of the sun began to reach 
us from across the water, a feeling of immense gratitude started in 
my chest and spread throughout my body. Without realizing it, my 
context had completely shifted. I had stepped through the looking 
glass and now could clearly see a new way of life. I began to cry, not 
with sadness, but with profound wonder at the perfection, bounty, and 
abundance that surrounded not just Kim and me, but all of us.
Slowly, I realized that too much of the time, my fear of not 
being enough or not having enough prevented me from allowing the 
abundance that life here on earth offers. I realized that my personal 
struggle to become rich was primarily my personal struggle against my 
fear of being poor. I also realized why my rich dad always said, “It is 
your fear that makes you your own prisoner. It is your fear that locks 
you in your own cell, a prison that does not let the abundance of God 
in.” My mind drifted back to my youth and I could hear him saying, 
“Too often we think we are alone and we have to survive on our own. 
Too often we believe that, in order to survive, we need to do our job 
on our own. We are often taught that it is the survival of the fittest 
and if we are not fit, we do not survive. That is the way a prisoner 
thinks. Many people are financial prisoners of their fears. That is why 
they cling to threads of security, become greedy, and fight for scraps 
of money like starving dogs fighting over a meatless bone, rather than 
seek financial freedom.
“Finding your own freedom is easy. All you have to do is first look 
and see what God wants done, and then do what God wants done 
with the gifts that God has given you. If you will faithfully do that, the 
abundance of God will pour into your life. Life is not about earning 
a living. Just look at the birds, the plants, and all of nature’s creations 
around you. Birds don’t earn a living. Birds and God’s other creatures 
simply do what they were sent here to do. If you will simply trust in 
God and do what you were sent here to do, God’s abundance will be 
with you forever.” 
In Closing372
Rich dad also said, “You don’t have to do the bird’s job. The bird 
is already doing it.” He said that because he saw too many humans 
competing for jobs, rather than looking to see what needs to be done. He 
said, “If you will look to see what needs to be done, and do what needs to 
be done, you will tap into God’s abundance.”
Kim and I sat at our little table on the beach for another hour. For 
the first time in my life, I understood what rich dad was saying. I had not 
fully understood him before this. I still had my personal context or reality 
in the way of letting his words in. But sitting on that beach, I finally 
stepped through the looking glass, and fully understood my rich dad.
As the wind off the ocean began to pick up, I could hear the horses 
in the background becoming restless. It was time for them to go home, 
and so it was for Kim and me. 
A year later, I was sitting silently in my cabin on my mountaintop, 
asking myself the questions, “What needs to be done?” and “What can 
I do?”
When people ask me today why I keep working even though I do 
not need the money, the answer is my rich dad’s answer. I say, “I keep 
working because there are things that need to be done.” Today, all Kim 
and I do is leverage what we have learned to do more of what needs to 
be done. Ironically, the more Kim and I apply leverage in order to do 
what needs to be done, the happier and richer we become.
The good news is that you do not have to quit your job to do what 
needs to be done. You do not have to retire to do what needs to be 
done. Just look around you, and you will see what needs to be done. 
All you have to do is do what needs to be done with the gifts you have 
been given. If you will do that, you will tap into the abundance that 
has always been here for all of us, not just some of us.
My last day on that beautiful private island in Fiji was spent sitting 
on the beach, doing absolutely nothing. I had nothing to go home to 
except a whole new way of living, living as a free person. I squeezed 
Kim’s hand, letting her know how much I loved her, respected her, 
and thanked her for sticking with me through this journey. I could 
not have made it without her. Just before we picked up our beach mat 
Guide To Investing373
and headed back for dinner, I could hear rich dad saying, “Many small 
people spend their lives attacking giants. They criticize, gossip, spread 
rumors, and lie about them, doing their best to tear them down. They 
see what is wrong with the giant, rather than what is right. That is why 
they remain small. David may have been young, and he did not have 
much, only a simple slingshot. He may have been physically smaller 
than Goliath, but David was not a small person.” 
The point of this book is that each of us has a small person, a 
David, and a Goliath inside of us. David could have stayed a small 
person by taking on the context of a small person, saying, “He’s bigger 
than I am. How can I take on a giant with only a slingshot?” Instead, 
David became a giant by choosing to take on the context of a giant. 
That is how he beat Goliath and became a giant himself. You can do 
the same.
In closing, leverage is everywhere. Leverage is power. Leverage is 
found inside of us, all around us, and invented by us. With each new 
invention—inventions such as the automobile, airplane, telephone, 
television, and the Internet—a new form of leverage is invented. With 
each new form of leverage, new millionaires and billionaires are created 
because they used the new leverage, not ruined or abused the new 
leverage. So always remember that the power of leverage can be used, 
abused, or feared. How you choose to use the power of leverage in 
your life is up to you and only you.
Thank you for reading this book. Remember to keep an open 
context. The future is very bright. The future will bring freedom for 
more and more people.

375About the Author 
Robert Kiyosaki
Best known as the author of Rich Dad Poor Dad —the #1 personal 
finance book of all time—Robert Kiyosaki has challenged and changed 
the way tens of millions of people around the world think about money. 
He is an entrepreneur, educator, and investor who believes the world 
needs more entrepreneurs who will create jobs.
With perspectives on money and investing that often contradict 
conventional wisdom, Robert has earned an international reputation for 
straight talk, irreverence, and courage and has become a passionate and 
outspoken advocate for financial education.
Robert and Kim Kiyosaki are founders of The Rich Dad Company, a 
financial education company, and creators of the CASHFLOW® games. 
In 2014, the company will leverage the global success of the Rich Dad 
games in the launch of a new and breakthrough offering in mobile and 
online gaming. 
Robert has been heralded as a visionary who has a gift for simplifying 
complex concepts—ideas related to money, investing, finance, and 
economics—and has shared his personal journey to financial freedom in 
ways that resonate with audiences of all ages and backgrounds. His core 
principles and messages—like “your house is not an asset” and “invest for 
cash flow” and “savers are losers”—have ignited a firestorm of criticism 
and ridicule… only to have played out on the world economic stage over 
the past decade in ways that were both unsettling and prophetic.   
His point of view is that “old” advice—go to college, get a good job, 
save money, get out of debt, invest for the long term, and diversify—has 
become obsolete advice in today’s fast-paced Information Age. His Rich 
Dad philosophies and messages challenge the status quo. His teachings 
encourage people to become financially educated and to take an active 
role in investing for their future. 
About the Author
376The author of 19 books, including the international blockbuster Rich 
Dad Poor Dad , Robert has been a featured guest with media outlets 
in every corner of the world—from CNN, the BBC, Fox News, Al 
Jazeera, GBTV and PBS, to Larry King Live , Oprah , Peoples Daily , 
Sydney Morning Herald , The Doctors , Straits Times , Bloomberg , NPR, 
USA TODAY , and hundreds of others—and his books have topped 
international bestsellers lists for more than a decade. He continues to 
teach and inspire audiences around the world.
His most recent books include Unfair Advantage: The Power of Financial 
Education, Midas Touch , the second book he has co-authored with 
Donald T rump, and Why “A” Students Work for “C” Students .
To learn more, visit RichDad.com 



Best-selling Books
by Robert T. Kiyosaki  
Rich Dad Poor Dad  
What the Rich Teach Their Kids About Money –  
That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not
Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant
Guide to Financial Freedom
Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing
What the Rich Invest in That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not
Rich Dad’s Rich Kid Smart Kid
Give Your Child a Financial Head Start
Rich Dad’s Retire Young Retire Rich
How to Get Rich and Stay Rich
Rich Dad’s Prophecy
Why the Biggest Stock Market Crash in History Is Still Coming...
And How You Can Prepare Yourself and Profit from It!
Rich Dad’s Success Stories
Real-Life Success Stories from Real-Life People  
Who Followed the Rich Dad Lessons
Rich Dad’s Guide to Becoming Rich  
Without Cutting Up Your Credit Cards  
T urn Bad Debt into Good Debt
Rich Dad’s Who T ook My Money?
Why Slow Investors Lose and Fast Money Wins!  
Rich Dad Poor Dad for T eens
The Secrets About Money – That You Don’t Learn In School!  
Escape the Rat Race
Learn How Money Works and Become a Rich Kid  
Rich Dad’s Before You Quit Your Job
Ten Real-Life Lessons Every Entrepreneur Should Know  
About Building a Multimillion-Dollar Business  
Rich Dad’s Increase Your Financial IQ
Get Smarter with Your Money  
Robert Kiyosaki’s Conspiracy of the Rich
The 8 New Rules of Money
Unfair Advantage
The Power of Financial Education
Why “A” Students Work for “C” Students
Rich Dad’s Guide to Financial Education for Parents
